N-linked glycosylation is the addition of oligosaccharides to proteins that enter the secretory pathway. The core of the oligosaccharide is assembled on a dolichol carrier in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is then transferred en bloc to the amide nitrogen of Asn in the sequence Asn-X-Ser / Thr. The addition of further sugars is then ordered, occurring in the Golgi complex, and is responsible for generating the enormous structural diversity of N-linked oligosaccharides found in eukaryotic cells.
The addition of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to serine or threonine residues of proteins is known as mucin-type O-glycosylation. This modification is essential for the biological function of many proteins, including immunoglobulins, and is also involved in the selectin-mediated adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium. The addition of N-acetylgalactosamine is catalyzed by a family of polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (ppGalNAc-Ts). The human genome encodes at least twelve distinct ppGalNAc-Ts, each of which exhibits a distinct expression pattern and substrate specificity. The polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases transfer GalNAc from the nucleotide sugar UDP-GalNAc to the hydroxyl groups of serine or threonine residues. The substrate specificity of the ppGalNAc-Ts is partially determined by the primary sequence of the peptide acceptor, but also by the presence of specific adjacent amino acids such as proline and tryptophan. The activity of the ppGalNAc-Ts is regulated in a complex manner by the availability of the nucleotide sugar donor, the Golgi pH, and the protein kinase A and C signaling pathways. The activity of the ppGalNAc-Ts is also regulated by feedback inhibition by the product, the O-linked trisaccharide, which is added by the core 1 synthase, C1GALT1. The regulation of the ppGalNAc-Ts ensures that the addition of mucin-type O-glycans is specific and occurs only on proteins that have been correctly folded. Disruption of the ppGalNAc-T genes in mice has revealed that the enzymes exhibit some functional redundancy, however, some of the ppGalNAc-Ts exhibit unique and essential functions. Loss of the ppGalNAc-T1 gene results in embryonic lethality due to defects in placental development. Mice lacking ppGalNAc-T2 exhibit a defect in T cell development and a reduction in B cells. Mice lacking ppGalNAc-T3 exhibit a defect in terminal sialylation of glycoproteins and are resistant to infection by the gastrointestinal pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Mice lacking ppGalNAc-T4 exhibit defects in lactation due to a lack of glycosylation of the milk protein Mucin-1. Mice lacking ppGalNAc-T5 exhibit defects in both T and B cell development and are also resistant to Helicobacter pylori infection. Mice lacking ppGalNAc-T6 exhibit no obvious phenotype.
The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) membrane anchor is found in many organisms, including fungi, parasites and mammals. The core structure of the GPI anchor is conserved in all eukaryotes and is composed of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc), myoinositol (MI), and a phosphoethanolamine (EthN) that is linked to the 6-position of the inositol ring via an 1- > 6-phosphodiester bond (Figure 1). The structure of the core GPI anchor is conserved in all eukaryotes, but the way in which it is synthesized is somewhat different in different organisms. In mammals, the precursor for the GPI anchor is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and then transported to the plasma membrane where it is used as a membrane anchor for proteins. In contrast, in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the GPI precursor is synthesized in the ER and then transported to the Golgi where it is modified by addition of phosphoethanolamine (EthN) and mannose (Man) to produce the mature GPI anchor. In the third step, the GPI transamidase complex, which is conserved in all eukaryotes, catalyzes the amide bond formation between the C-terminal glycine of the protein and EthN of the GPI precursor. In S. cerevisiae, the GPI transamidase is composed of five proteins, GPI8O, GPI1 2, GPI1 0, and SEC5 3. In addition to the proteins that make up the GPI transamidase, there are several proteins that are involved in the remodeling of the GPI anchor after it is attached to proteins. These include the phosphatidylinositol (PI) -specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC), which cleaves the bond between EthN and MI to release the GPI-anchored protein from the membrane, and the GPI-specific phospholipase D (GPI-PLD), which cleaves the phosphodiester bond between EthN and MI to release the GPI anchor from the lipid bilayer. In mammals, the remodeling of the GPI anchor occurs in the extracellular environment after the protein is anchored to the membrane. In contrast, in S. cerevisiae, remodeling of the GPI anchor does not occur in the extracellular environment but takes place in the Golgi. The difference in the way in which the GPI anchor is remodeled in mammals and yeast is likely related to the different functions of the GPI-anchored proteins in these two organisms. In mammals, the GPI-anchored proteins are involved in the regulation of cellular activation, differentiation and motility, while in S. cerevisiae they are involved in the attachment of enzymes to the cell wall. The difference in the function of the GPI-anchored proteins in these two organisms may explain the difference in the way in which the GPI anchor is remodeled in these two organisms.
Homologous recombination (HR) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) are two major mechanisms to repair DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in cells. In mammalian cells, the repair of DSBs by HR is restricted to the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, while NHEJ is active throughout the cell cycle. The process of HR is largely dependent on the presence of a homologous DNA sequence as a template for repair, while NHEJ directly joins the ends of the DSB together. In addition to the factors involved in the core NHEJ pathway, recent studies have identified several factors that are involved in the regulation of NHEJ and / or HR. These factors include the breast cancer susceptibility gene product BRCA1, the ataxia telangiectasia-mutated gene product ATM, and the Mre1 1-Rad5 0-Nbs1 (MRN) complex. BRCA1 and ATM are involved in both HR and NHEJ, while the MRN complex plays a key role in the initial processing of the DSB ends prior to repair by either HR or NHEJ. CtIP is another factor that regulates the choice of DSB repair pathway. In the absence of CtIP, HR is enhanced while NHEJ is reduced.
The lysosome is a major site for the degradation of macromolecules and is involved in a number of important cellular functions. The major function of the lysosome is to degrade unneeded or damaged cellular components. Lysosomal enzymes are responsible for breaking down complex molecules into their component parts, which are then transported to the cytoplasm for further metabolism. In addition to this important role, the lysosome is involved in the processing and presentation of antigens for presentation to the immune system. Lysosomal enzymes are transported into the lysosome from the Golgi in vesicles coated with clathrin. The formation of these vesicles is mediated by a protein complex called the AP-3 complex. The AP-3 complex is similar in structure to the AP-2 complex involved in endocytosis, but has a different set of subunits. The AP-3 complex is involved in the transport of specific proteins to the lysosome, including the cathepsins. In addition to the proteins involved in forming clathrin-coated vesicles, there are a number of proteins that are involved in the sorting of proteins into vesicles within the Golgi. These include the cation-dependent (CDII) and -independent (CI) mannose-6-phosphate receptors. Other proteins involved in the sorting of proteins into lysosomes include sortilin and the transmembrane protein Lamp-2. Some proteins are transported to the lysosome via both the CDII and CI-MPR pathways. Some lysosomal enzymes, including cathepsin D, are synthesized as inactive precursors that require proteolytic cleavage to become active. This cleavage is carried out by cathepsin D itself in the lysosome. Some cathepsins, including cathepsin B, are transported to the lysosome via an alternative route independent of mannose-6-phosphate receptors. Other lysosomal enzymes, such as acid alpha-glucosidase, are transported to the lysosome directly from the Golgi without any intermediate vesicles. Once in the lysosome, the majority of proteins are stable and do not exchange with other proteins in the cytosol. However, some proteins, including the cathepsins, are transported to the lysosome in vesicles that do not exchange with other proteins in the cytosol.
Mitochondria are involved in a variety of essential cellular functions such as energy production, apoptosis, and calcium signaling. The mitochondrial membrane contains several proteins that are essential for electron transport and ATP synthesis. The mitochondrial genome encodes for 1 3 proteins in humans, all of which are essential structural components of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. In addition to the mitochondrial genome, there are over 8 0 nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins. Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm and are imported into mitochondria. Mitochondrial proteins are synthesized with an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence or presequence that is cleaved upon entry into mitochondria. The majority of mitochondrial proteins are synthesized with a formyl group on the initiator methionine. The mitochondrial matrix is the site of protein synthesis and folding. The mitochondrial inner membrane contains the electron transport chain and two additional proteins, cytochrome c and cytochrome c oxidase. The electron transport chain consists of a series of protein complexes that transfer electrons from NADH and FADH2 to molecular oxygen to create a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane that is used to drive ATP synthase. Approximately 1 0 – 1 5 polypeptides make up the electron transport chain in mammalian mitochondria. Complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is the largest of the electron transport chains, with a molecular weight of approximately 1MDa. Complex I consists of at least 4 different subunits in yeast and at least 3 0 different subunits in mammals. Complex I in mammals contains 13 different subunits that are encoded by the mitochondrial genome. Complex II (succinate-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is composed of only 2 subunits, one of which is encoded by the mitochondrial genome. Complex III (ubiquinone-cytochrome c reductase) is also called the b6f complex and is composed of 1 1 different subunits in yeast and 1 3 in mammals. Complex III in mammals contains two subunits that are encoded by the mitochondrial genome. Complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase) is the smallest of the electron transport chains, with a molecular weight of 1MDa. Complex IV in mammals contains 3 subunits that are all encoded by the mitochondrial genome. The assembly of the mitochondrial electron transport chain requires the coordinated expression and import of both nuclear and mitochondrial encoded proteins. Uncoordinated expression of mitochondrial and nuclear encoded electron transport chain proteins can result in the formation of unfunctional protein complexes and loss of mitochondrial function. Several genetic disorders have been identified that result from defects in mitochondrial protein synthesis or the assembly of mitochondrial proteins. The clinical presentation of these disorders can vary widely, depending on the specific protein affected and the severity of the mutation.
Gustatory perception of taste begins with the recognition of specific taste qualities (sweet, umami, salty, sour and bitter) by taste receptor cells in the oral cavity. The taste of each of these qualities is then transduced into an electrical signal that is transmitted to the brain through the gustatory nerves. The taste of each of these four basic taste qualities is initiated by the activation of specific taste receptors expressed in the taste receptor cells. The sweet taste is initiated by the binding of sucrose, glucose, or other sugars to a G-protein coupled receptor, the sweet taste receptor. The umami taste is initiated by the binding of glutamate to a G-protein coupled receptor, the umami taste receptor. The salty taste is initiated by the binding of sodium chloride to a G-protein coupled receptor, the sodium taste receptor. The sour taste is initiated by the detection of protons by a specific ion channel, the acid taste channel. Finally, the bitter taste is initiated by the binding of compounds such as quinine to specific taste receptors. There are at least two distinct bitter taste receptors, TAS1R and TAS2R, that are expressed in the taste receptor cells. The TAS1R receptors are G-protein coupled receptors that are activated by the binding of tastants to trigger the taste response. The TAS2R receptors are GPCRs and are activated by tastants that are not perceived as tasting bitter. The taste of each of the four basic taste qualities is initiated by the activation of a specific taste receptor expressed in the taste receptor cells.
The majority of body ammonia is produced in the liver through the action of glutaminase, which catalyzes the hydrolysis of glutamine to release ammonia and glutamate. Glutamate is then released into the blood from the liver and is transported to the kidneys to be converted to ammonia and reabsorbed. In the kidneys, ammonia is released into the urine through the action of the apical membrane ammonia channel aquaporin 1 (AQP1). Ammonia is also produced in the intestinal tract through the action of glutaminase, and is released into the blood through the action of AQP1 in the intestine. In acidosis, ammonia production in the intestine and kidneys increases to help excrete excess acid. In addition to producing ammonia for excretion, the kidneys also release glutamine into the blood to be used as a source of nitrogen for the synthesis of amino acids and other nitrogen-containing compounds. The release of glutamine and other amino acids by the kidneys is stimulated by acidosis to help meet the increased nitrogen demands of the body. Glutaminase, the enzyme that releases ammonia from glutamine, is stimulated by acidosis through the action of the transcription factor ATF4. In addition to stimulating the production and release of ammonia and glutamine, acidosis also stimulates the transport of these compounds into cells in the kidneys and intestine to help meet the increased nitrogen demands of the body. In the intestine, glutamine is transported into cells by the sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter SN2 (SNAT2). In the kidneys, ammonia and glutamine are transported into cells by the apical membrane ammonia channel AQP1. In addition to being a source of nitrogen for the production of amino acids and other nitrogen-containing compounds, ammonia and glutamine are also potent buffers in the blood. As the pH of the blood decreases, the concentration of ammonia and glutamine in the blood increases due to the dissociation of ammonia and glutamine molecules. At low pH, ammonia and glutamine are more soluble and are transported more efficiently across cell membranes to help meet the increased nitrogen demands of the body.
The cortical actin cytoskeleton forms a dense network beneath the plasma membrane in eukaryotic cells. This network provides a scaffold for many important cellular functions such as cell shape maintenance, cell motility, cell division, and intracellular transport. The actin cytoskeleton is also involved in signal transduction. The ezrin / radixin / moesin (ERM) proteins provide a direct link between the plasma membrane and the actin cytoskeleton. The interaction of ERM proteins with membrane proteins and actin is regulated by phosphorylation of ERM proteins. The phosphorylation of ERM proteins is regulated by Rho and protein kinase C (PKC). Rho activates PKC and induces the phosphorylation of ERM proteins. The phosphorylation of ERM proteins increases their affinity for the plasma membrane and actin, resulting in the formation of actin-based structures such as filopodia and lamellopodia. The lymphocyte antigen 96 (CD19) and the transferrin receptor (TFR) are both transmembrane proteins that associate with the actin cytoskeleton. The cytoplasmic domains of these proteins contain binding sites for actin. The tyrosine kinase Lyn binds to the cytoplasmic domain of CD19 and recruits cortactin to the complex. Cortactin is a substrate for Src kinases and interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex, which induces the formation of branched actin networks like those found in lamellipodia. The CrkL adaptor protein binds to both cortactin and Lyn. The CrkL and cortactin interactions may stabilize the formation of branched actin networks and lamellipodia induced by CD19 and TFR. The CrkL and cortactin interactions may also play a role in actin reorganization induced by other receptors. In addition to regulating the actin cytoskeleton, Rho also regulates microtubule dynamics. The microtubule cytoskeleton plays a critical role in the organization of the cytoplasm and the formation of cell shape. The dynamic instability of microtubules allows them to rapidly rearrange in response to extracellular signals. The binding of tubulin to the microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) affects microtubule growth and shrinkage. The stathmin / Op1 8 family of proteins regulates microtubule dynamics. Phosphorylation of stathmin / Op1 8 by kinases such as MAPK and cdc25 regulates its activity. The microtubule network also plays a role in intracellular transport. The dynein motor protein binds to microtubules and is involved in the transport of vesicles and organelles in and out of the cell. The interaction of dynein with microtubules is regulated by kinesin and dynactin. The dynactin complex is required for dynein function. The hepatitis C virus (HCV) envelope protein E2 interacts with the microtubule network. E2 binding to microtubules may play a role in the intracellular transport of HCV.
The immune system relies on a variety of cells to respond to invading pathogens and to communicate with each other. B cells, T cells, NK cells, and macrophages all rely on cell surface proteins to communicate with each other and with other cells. The T cell receptor complex and the Fc receptor for IgG are two of the most important cell surface proteins in the immune system. The T cell receptor complex is responsible for the recognition of specific antigens, and is expressed on the surface of all T cells. The Fc receptor for IgG is expressed on the surface of all macrophages and some B cells. The Fc receptor is required for the transport of IgG antibodies from the circulation to sites of infection and inflammation, and is also involved in the activation of B cells. The genes for the T cell receptor complex and the Fc receptor for IgG are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The genes for the T cell receptor complex and the Fc receptor for IgG are both located on chromosome 13 in humans. The T cell receptor is a heterodimer of alpha and beta chains, with the beta chain being unique to the T cell receptor complex. The Fc receptor is a heterodimer of gamma and delta chains, with the gamma chain being unique to the Fc receptor. The genes for the T cell receptor complex and the Fc receptor are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to respond, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to respond, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to respond, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to function, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to respond, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to play a role in immune function. The T cell receptor and the Fc receptor are both required for the immune system to respond, and their genes are both part of the MHC II gene complex.
The T cell receptor complex plays a key role in the immune system. The specificity of the receptor is governed by the binding site formed from the mature alpha and beta chains (shown here) or gamma and delta chains in gamma / delta T cells. The alpha and beta chains are each composed of a variable (V) domain, a transmembrane domain and a constant (C) domain. The V domain determines the specificity of the receptor while the C domain determines the overall level of expression. The gamma and delta chains are formed from a single V and C domain and are expressed in the gamma / delta T cell population at a lower level than the alpha / beta T cell population. The gamma and delta chains are not paired with alpha or beta chains to form a functional receptor but form a disulphide-linked dimer that is required for efficient gamma / delta T cell development. The gamma and delta chains are not randomly paired but are selected from a limited pool of V genes. The basis for this selection is not known but may be related to the structure of the gamma and delta loci or to the expression of specific transcriptional regulators. Upon activation the T cell receptor complex induces a signal transduction cascade that leads to T cell activation. The cytoplasmic domains of the alpha and beta chains contain several motifs that are involved in this signaling. The canonical T cell receptor signaling pathway involves the src family kinases Lck and Fyn and the ZAP70 kinase. The Lck and Fyn kinases phosphorylate the T cell receptor complex which then serves as a docking site for the ZAP70 kinase. The phosphorylation of ZAP70 induces its activation and the downstream activation of several pathways including the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phospholipase C pathways. The gamma and delta chains do not themselves have signaling motifs but are associated with the signaling molecules CD3epsilon, CD2z and CD2y. The CD3epsilon chain contains a YXXL motif that recruits the ZAP70 kinase and also provides a site for the binding of the Grb-2 adaptor protein. The CD2z and CD2y chains contain ITAMs that recruit the Syk family kinases Syk and ZAP70. The formation of the T cell receptor complex induces the phosphorylation of several other proteins that may play a role in the regulation of T cell receptor signaling or in the modulation of T cell receptor signaling in response to other stimuli.
The interaction of the extracellular matrix (ECM) with the cytoskeleton and membrane receptors plays a key role in cell shape, adhesion, migration and proliferation. The extracellular matrix is composed of a network of proteins called the extracellular matrix (ECM) that are attached to the cell surface by transmembrane proteins. The intracellular cytoskeleton is composed of actin filaments, which form a network that is linked to the ECM through specialized structures like focal adhesions. In addition to the actin filaments, there are other cytoskeletal elements like microtubules and intermediate filaments that provide support and flexibility to cells. Cells also have membrane associated proteins like integrins that interact with the ECM. Integrins are a family of cell surface receptors that mediate cell to ECM and cell to cell adhesion. There are > 1 8 alpha subunits and 8beta subunits that combine to form 2 4 distinct integrins that combine to form 2 4 different heterodimers. Each integrin heterodimer has a distinct pattern of expression and ligates to specific ECM proteins. The extracellular domain of the integrin binds to specific ECM proteins like collagen, laminin or fibronectin. The intracellular domain interacts with cytoskeletal elements and signaling molecules to transmit the adhesion signal. In addition to mediating adhesion, integrins can transduce signals into the cell in response to extracellular stimuli like chemokines, growth factors and hormones. Growth factors like insulin and EGF activate integrin mediated signaling through focal adhesion kinase (FAK). FAK is a tyrosine kinase that is recruited to the integrin receptor complex where it is phosphorylated and activates downstream signaling pathways like the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) pathway. The activation of integrin receptors by ECM proteins or growth factors induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of several other proteins like paxillin, shc and the focal adhesion kinase (FAK). The combination of integrin receptor activation, tyrosine phosphorylation of signaling molecules and cytoskeletal elements leads to changes in cell shape, migration, proliferation and gene expression. Deficiencies in integrins or in integrin mediated signaling have been associated with disease states. For example, mutations in the integrin subunit alpha 7in humans leads to muscular dystrophy, indicating the importance of integrin mediated signaling in muscle function.
The integrin family of cell surface receptors interacts with the extracellular matrix (ECM) and mediates intracellular signals in response to the extracellular matrix that affect cellular functions such as proliferation, differentiation, and migration. The extracellular domain of integrins interacts with ECM proteins such as collagen, laminin and fibronectin while the cytoplasmic domain interacts with cytoskeletal elements and signaling pathways. Integrins do not themselves possess a kinase domain or enzymatic activity but rely on association with other signaling molecules to transmit signals. Interactions between the extracellular matrix and the actin cytoskeleton commonly take place at focal adhesions on the cell surface that contain localized concentrations of integrins, signaling molecules and cytoskeletal elements. Interactions between integrins and the actin cytoskeleton are important for the formation of cell to cell junctions such as adherens junctions and tight junctions. In addition to mediating interactions between the ECM and the cytoskeleton, integrins can communicate with other signaling pathways. Integrins can alter the activity of growth factor receptors such as the EGF receptor and can modulate the activity of the MAPK pathway. The intracellular domain of the integrin adhesome protein paxillin interacts with FAK, a kinase involved in integrin signaling, and with src, another integrin signaling molecule. Paxillin also interacts with the CrkL adaptor protein, which may regulate integrin signaling through the DOCK1 8 0 / Elmo Rac1 and cdc4 2 pathways. The CrkL-mediated pathways activate the Rac and cdc4 2 small GTPases, which in turn activate the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin polymerization to form lamellipodia and filopodia, structures involved in cell migration. The focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and src also regulate the actin cytoskeleton and are required for integrin-mediated cell spreading and formation of focal adhesions. The interaction of integrins with the actin cytoskeleton and modulation of growth factor signaling may be important for the role of integrins in cellular transformation and proliferation.
The integrin family of cell surface receptors and their associated extracellular matrix ligands play important roles in a broad range of cellular functions. The extracellular domains of the integrins interact with the extracellular matrix, while the cytoplasmic domains interact with cytoskeletal elements and signaling molecules to mediate these functions. The extracellular domains of the integrins are involved in cell-cell interactions as well. The integrin family is comprised of > 1 5 different subunits that combine to form > 1 million distinct receptors. The combination of subunits creates a diverse set of receptors with distinct expression patterns and ligand specificities. The alpha4beta1 heterodimer is the most widely expressed integrin in hematopoietic cells and binds to the extracellular matrix proteins fibronectin, laminin and collagen. The binding of fibronectin to the alpha4beta1 integrin stimulates cell spreading and the formation of focal adhesions. In addition to mediating cell-matrix interactions, the alpha4beta1 integrin plays a role in lymphocyte activation and migration. The alpha7beta1 integrin is expressed in muscle cells and binds to the same extracellular matrix proteins as the alpha4beta1 integrin. In addition to mediating cell-matrix interactions, the alpha7beta1 integrin plays a role in cell survival and migration in muscle cells. The intracellular domains of the integrins do not themselves have intrinsic catalytic activity, but interact with signaling molecules to mediate their functions. The focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a key molecule involved in integrin signaling. The binding of fibronectin to the alpha4beta1 integrin activates FAK, which in turn phosphorylates downstream targets that regulate cell spreading and migration. The integrin-mediated activation of adenylate cyclase appears to be a key component of integrin signaling in muscle cells. The activation of adenylate cyclase by the alpha7beta1 integrin prevents apoptosis in muscle cells and may play a role in muscle development.
The glycolytic pathway begins with the simple sugar glucose and leads to the Kreb's cycle and the Kreb's cycle's end product, pyruvate, in the TCA cycle. The Kreb's cycle and the glycolytic pathway are linked by acetyl-CoA, the two-carbon donor in the Kreb's cycle that is also a key metabolite in glycolysis. The conversion of glucose to pyruvate is catalyzed by hexokinase, which phosphorylates glucose to form glucose-6-phosphate. Glucose-6-phosphate is then converted to fructose-6-phosphate by the enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase. Fructose-6-phosphate is next converted to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and then to pyruvate by the enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The last step in glycolysis is the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, which enters the Kreb's cycle to create a large pool of reduced NADH that is used to drive the electron transport chain. The electron transport chain uses NADH to create a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane that is used to produce ATP by ATP synthase. The high energy phosphate bonds in ATP are extracted and converted to chemical energy in the form of ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) when they are used to drive various reactions. The cell must therefore tightly regulate the concentrations of its metabolites to maintain energy homeostasis. If the concentration of glucose in the blood increases, then the body will increase insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells to help lower the blood glucose level. If the glucose concentration is too high, then the body will use glycolysis to produce pyruvate to make more glucose, but if the level of pyruvate is too high then the body will use the Kreb's cycle to make more pyruvate, lose energy and die. If the pyruvate level is too low, the body will use the Kreb's cycle to make less pyruvate, lose energy and die. The regulation of the pyruvate concentration in the cell is therefore crucial to the health of the body. As with other metabolic pathways, the regulation of the pyruvate concentration in the cell is complex. There are several steps that can be regulated to alter the concentration of pyruvate in the cell, including the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase, the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA and that is a key regulatory step in the Kreb's cycle. The activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase is in turn regulated by the phosphorylation state of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is a multi-enzyme complex that is tightly regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. The activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is high when it is dephosphorylated and low when it is phosphorylated. The phosphorylation state of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is regulated by a protein kinase (PDK) that phosphorylates pyruvate dehydrogenase and a protein phosphatase (PP2A) that dephosphorylates it. The activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is also regulated by the concentration of acetyl-CoA. The concentration of acetyl-CoA is regulated by the activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase, which is the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in the synthesis of fatty acids. The activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase is in turn regulated by the concentration of malonyl-CoA, which is the product of the enzyme ACC. The concentration of malonyl-CoA also regulates the activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, with higher levels of malonyl-CoA inhibiting the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and lower levels of malonyl-CoA activating it. The activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is also regulated by the NADH / NAD + ratio, with higher NADH / NAD + ratios inhibiting the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and higher NAD + / NADH ratios activating it. The regulation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex ensures that the concentration of pyruvate in the cell is maintained at a constant level despite changes in the concentration of glucose in the blood.
The Krebs cycle, also called the citric acid cycle, is a fundamental metabolic pathway involving eight enzymes essential for energy production through aerobic respiration and the biosynthesis of fatty acids, amino acids and steroids. This pathway was first identified and named by Otto Warburg when he observed that it was absent in tumors. The Krebs cycle takes place in mitochondria where it oxidizes acetyl-CoA to carbon dioxide and water, and transfers the resulting high-energy electrons to the electron transport chain to create a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane that is used to drive synthesis of ATP by ATP synthase. The Krebs cycle is a highly conserved metabolic pathway found in bacteria, plants and animals. In animals, the cycle is initiated by the carboxylation of pyruvate by pyruvate carboxylase to produce oxaloacetate. oxaloacetate is then decarboxylated and condensed with acetyl-CoA to produce citrate. The cycle is completed with the oxidation of isocitrate to alpha-ketoglutarate, which is then converted to succinyl-CoA by succinyl-CoA synthetase. Succinyl-CoA is a key metabolic intermediate that enters multiple pathways. One important role of succinyl-CoA is to act as a substrate for the synthesis of heme, which is synthesized in the mitochondria of red blood cells. Another important role of succinyl-CoA is to act as a substrate for the enzyme activity of alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, which catalyzes the first irreversible step of the Krebs cycle. The activity of alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is a key regulatory step in the Krebs cycle and is regulated by the ratio of GTP to ATP. When the ratio of GTP to ATP is high, alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is activated to catalyze the conversion of alpha-ketoglutarate to succinyl-CoA and CO2. When the ratio of GTP to ATP is low, alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is inhibited and the Krebs cycle is repressed. The activity of alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is also regulated by the concentration of its substrate, alpha-ketoglutarate. When the concentration of alpha-ketoglutarate is high, the enzyme is activated.
The glycolytic pathway begins with the simple sugar glucose and leads to the Kreb's cycle and the Kreb's cycle's end products, pyruvate and acetyl-CoA. Fructose 6-phosphate is an important junction point in this pathway, branching into the pathways leading to the production of triose phosphates, the pentose phosphate pathway and the production of E4P, a key precursor for nucleotide biosynthesis. The first step in the production of E4P is the phosphorylation of fructose 6-phosphate by phosphofructokinase (PFK). There are two forms of PFK in mammals, a muscle form (M-PFK) and a liver form (L-PFK). The activity of M-PFK is regulated by several factors, the most important of which is ATP, which inhibits the enzyme in the presence of glucose. When the concentration of glucose falls, the concentration of ATP increases, releasing the inhibition of M-PFK and allowing the pathway to proceed forward. Fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate is an activator of M-PFK and also of L-PFK. The concentration of fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate is regulated by the activities of phosphofructokinase and fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase. The activity of phosphofructokinase is stimulated by fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate, which is produced by phosphofructokinase and degraded by fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase. The activity of fructose-1, 6-bisphosphatase is inhibited by AMP and activated by fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate. The ratio of fructose 1, 6-bisphosphatase to phosphofructokinase activity determines the concentration of fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate and, hence, the rate of glycolysis. The second step in the production of E4P from fructose 6-phosphate is the phosphorylation of E4P by ribulose-5-phosphate-3-epimerase (RPE). RPE is a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) and so is found in high concentrations in the adrenal glands and kidneys. The activity of RPE is also regulated by several factors, the most important of which is ATP, which inhibits the activity of RPE. E4P is a key precursor in the biosynthesis of nucleotides. The first step in the production of deoxyribonucleotides from ribonucleotides is the phosphorylation of E4P by deoxyribose-phosphate aldolase (DERA). Deoxyribonucleotides are required for DNA replication and repair and are produced by the sequential phosphorylation of deoxyribonucleosides by deoxyribonucleoside kinases. The next step in the production of ribonucleotides is the phosphorylation of R5P by RPIA or RPIB. The next two steps in the biosynthesis of nucleotides are the phosphorylation of R5P by RPIA or RPIB followed by the phosphorylation of ADP or GDP by ribonucleotide reductase. The activity of ribonucleotide reductase is regulated by several factors, the most important of which is the concentration of dNTPs. The activity of this enzyme is also regulated by the concentration of R5P.
The electron transport system involved in the biosynthesis of steroid hormones is located in the mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum. The first step is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by the mitochondrial cytochrome P4 5 0scc (CYP1 1A1). Pregnenolone is then converted to progesterone, 1 7-hydroxyprogesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone and androstenedione by a series of reactions in the endoplasmic reticulum that are catalyzed by a series of cytochrome P4 5 0 enzymes. The final step is the conversion of androstenedione to testosterone by the microsomal cytochrome P4 5 0c1 7 (CYP1 7A1). The biosynthesis of steroid hormones takes place in the adrenal cortex, gonads and placenta. The adrenal cortex produces cortisol and aldosterone, the sex steroids testosterone and estradiol and the corticoid precursor dehydroepiandrosterone. The production of these steroids is regulated by the pituitary hormone ACTH, which stimulates the expression of the cytochrome P4 5 0 enzymes involved in their biosynthesis. The enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone and testosterone are all derived from a common precursor, pregnenolone. The first step in the biosynthesis of all these steroids is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by cytochrome P4 5 0scc. This reaction is the rate-limiting step in steroidogenesis and is regulated by ACTH. ACTH binds to its receptor in the adrenal cortex, causing activation of protein kinase A and phosphorylation of the cholesterol transporter StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein). StAR increases the movement of cholesterol from the outer to the inner mitochondrial membrane, where cytochrome P4 5 0scc is located. The subsequent conversion of pregnenolone to the other steroid hormones is catalyzed by a series of cytochrome P4 5 0 enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum. The first step is the conversion of progesterone to 1 7-hydroxyprogesterone by CYP1 7A1. This reaction is the only step in the biosynthesis of cortisol that does not involve a cytochrome P4 5 0 enzyme. The next step is the conversion of 1 7-hydroxyprogesterone to dehydroepiandrosterone by CYP1 9A1. This reaction is the first step in the biosynthesis of estrogen and is also the step that blocks the synthesis of testosterone. The final step is the conversion of androstenedione to testosterone by the microsomal cytochrome P4 5 0c1 7. This reaction is the only step in the biosynthesis of testosterone that does not involve a cytochrome P4 5 0 enzyme. The activity of CYP1 7A1 and CYP1 9A1 is inhibited by the binding of cortisol and testosterone to their respective receptors in the adrenal cortex. The inhibition of these enzymes by their end-products ensures that the production of cortisol, aldosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone and testosterone is coordinated with the stress response and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
The metabolism of steroid hormones is a complex process involving many enzymes. The enzymes involved in the metabolism of androgens include 5 alpha-reductase, 3 alpha- and 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, 1 7-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, and steroid sulfatase. The activities of these enzymes are essential for the biosynthesis of the male sex hormone testosterone and the female hormone estrogen. The activities of these enzymes are tissue specific and are regulated by steroid hormones and other factors. The enzymes involved in the metabolism of testosterone and estrogen are shown in Figure 1. The enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of testosterone are located in the testes and the ovaries. The conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by 5 alpha-reductase is the first step in the biosynthesis of both testosterone and estrogen. The second step is the reduction of DHT to 3 alpha-androstanediol by 3 alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The third step is the conversion of 3 alpha-androstanediol to estrone by 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The last step is the conversion of estrone to estradiol by steroid sulfatase. In addition to the enzymes shown in Figure 1, other enzymes may be involved in the metabolism of testosterone and estrogen. For example, hydroxysteroid 17-beta dehydrogenase (HSD1 7B2) may play a role in the biosynthesis of estrogen from testosterone by catalyzing the reversible reduction of estrone to estradiol and the conversion of DHT to 3 alpha-androstanediol. Other enzymes such as UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) may also play a role in the biosynthesis of estrogen by conjugating estradiol with glucuronic acid to form Estriol-Gluc. Estriol-Gluc is then excreted in the urine. Insufficient activity of HSD1 7B2 or UGT may result in higher levels of estradiol and possibly breast cancer.
The essential amino acid L-methionine is synthesized from L-threonine by the action of L-threonine dehydratase and the enzyme S-adenosyl-L-methionine synthetase. L-Methionine is a key metabolite in one-carbon metabolism and is involved in the biosynthesis of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), the major methyl group donor in biological systems. The transmethylation of DNA, proteins and lipids is one of the most important roles of SAM. The activity of L-methionine synthase is regulated by the intracellular concentration of folate and vitamin B1 2. Vitamin B1 2 acts as a cofactor for methylcobalamin, which is a key intermediate in the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine. Folate is required as a cofactor in the conversion of tetrahydrofolate (THF) to 5, 1 0-methylene-THF, which is the precursor of 5-methyl-THF. The conversion of L-serine to glycine is one of the main sources of intracellular one-carbon units. The activity of the glycine cleavage system is regulated by the ratio of reduced to oxidized cofactors. The oxidation of NADH and FADH2 regenerates NAD + and FADH, respectively, which are required by the glycine cleavage system. The cleavage of glycine releases a one-carbon unit that is transferred to THF, which is then converted to 5, 1 0-methylene-THF. This is the main entry point for one-carbon units into one-carbon metabolism, and is the step that regulates the flow of one-carbon units from glycine into other pathways. The conversion of serine to pyruvate and NH3 is another important source of one-carbon units. The synthesis of thymidylate from deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) and tetrahydrofolate (THF) is one important use of one-carbon units. The conversion of serine to glycine and the conversion of formate to CO2 and THF are important sources of one-carbon units in the biosynthesis of purines and pyrimidines. The activity of the glycine cleavage system is regulated by the ratio of reduced to oxidized cofactors. The activity of the betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase is also regulated by the ratio of reduced to oxidized cofactors. The methylation of homocysteine to methionine is an important regulatory point in one-carbon metabolism. The activity of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase is regulated by the concentration of SAM. The methylation of homocysteine to form methionine is also regulated by the activity of cystathionine beta-synthase. The activity of this enzyme is also regulated by the concentration of cysteine. The activity of betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase is also regulated by the concentration of glutathione. The activity of monoamine oxidases A and B is regulated by the concentration of hydrogen peroxide.
DNA methylation is the addition of a methyl group to the C5 position of cytosine residues in CpG dinucleotides by DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). This process is associated with gene silencing and is involved in the regulation of many biological processes. The methylation of cytosines in CpG islands in the promoter region of a gene can inhibit the binding of transcription factors and repress transcription. The methylation of cytosines in the CpG islands of the genome is a stable modification, but can also be reversed by the DNA demethylase Ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins. 5-methylcytosine is a key epigenetic mark that is essential for normal development. The activity of DNMTs is regulated by many factors, including the methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins (MBDs). The MBDs bind to methylated CpG dinucleotides and recruit histone deacetylases (HDACs) to the site to repress transcription. The activity of the TETs is also regulated by factors such as HIF-1, which induces the expression of the TETs during hypoxia, leading to the demethylation and activation of genes that are involved in angiogenesis and glycolysis. Demethylation by the TETs also leads to the generation of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, which may have a distinct role in the regulation of gene expression. The role of aberrant DNA methylation in cancer has been well established. The methylation of tumor suppressor genes leads to their inactivation, while the methylation of genes involved in apoptosis, cell cycle regulation and DNA repair can contribute to the development of cancer.
The biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate involves the coordinated action of several glycosyltransferases and sulfotransferases. The common disaccharide unit in these polysaccharides is -4GlcUAbeta1-3GalNAc-. The first step in the biosynthesis of both chondroitin and dermatan sulfate is the formation of the common disaccharide unit on which the various modifications subsequently are added. This reaction is catalyzed by the common chondroitin / dermatan synthase (CS / DS). The next step is the addition of a first sulfate group to position 6 of the GalNAc residue to form the disaccharide unit -4GlcUAbeta1-3GalNAc-6-SO3-. This reaction is catalyzed by the uronyl 2-sulfotransferase. The next step is the addition of a second sulfate group to the position 4 of the GalNAc residue to form the disulfated disaccharide unit -4GlcUAbeta1-3GalNAc (4, 6-di-O-sulfo) -. This reaction is catalyzed by the chondroitin 4-sulfotransferase. Finally, a third sulfate group is added to the position 6 of the GalNAc residue to form the trisulfated disaccharide unit -4GlcUAbeta1-3GalNAc (6, 3-di-O-sulfo). This reaction is catalyzed by the dermatan sulfate synthase. The biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate is a highly regulated process involving several different enzymes. The activities of the various enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of these polysaccharides are regulated by various factors including the concentration of the various UDP- and TDP-monosaccharides, the availability of the various acceptor substrates, and the action of various feedback inhibition mechanisms. This chapter will briefly describe the various enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate and then will provide detailed information on the various methods used to characterize these enzymes. < / FREETEXT > < / ABSTRACT > ▃
The human genome contains at least 4 9 genes that encode proteins involved in ATP-dependent transport of compounds across biological membranes. These genes are classified into 7 different gene families on the basis of their amino acid sequence similarities. The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters constitute one of the largest gene families, with at least 1 3 different human members identified to date. These transporters use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to transport a variety of compounds against concentration gradients. Most ABC transporters are expressed in a tissue-specific manner, often in association with the membrane of cellular vesicles. In addition to transporting compounds across biological membranes, some ABC transporters also play a role in the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of drugs and xenobiotics. Members of the ABC transporter gene family are found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In prokaryotes, ABC transporters are involved in the transport of drugs, peptides, and other xenobiotics into the cell to kill bacteria, while in eukaryotes they are involved in a variety of functions, including the transport of drugs, metabolites, peptides, lipids, sterols, antigens, and xenobiotics. Members of the human ABC transporter gene family can be classified into 3 different subfamilies on the basis of their amino acid sequence similarities and their predicted membrane topology. The ABCA subfamily contains 1 3 genes, the ABCB subfamily contains 9 genes, the ABCC subfamily contains 1 2 genes, and the ABCG subfamily contains 1 gene. The ABCA, ABCB, and ABCG subfamilies are predicted to have 1 2 transmembrane domains (TMDs) and 2 ATP-binding domains (NBDs), while the ABCC subfamily contains 6 TMDs and 2 NBDs. Members of the ABCA, ABCB, and ABCG subfamilies are involved in the transport of lipids, while the ABCC and ABCG subfamilies transport compounds ranging in size from ions to polypeptides. Members of the ABCC subfamily transport glutathione (GSH) -conjugated compounds, glucuronide (GLUC) - and sulfate (SUL) -conjugated compounds, and drugs conjugated to glutathione, glucuronate, or sulfate. The ABCG subfamily, also known as the multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRPs), transports a diverse range of compounds including glutathione (GSH), glucuronide, and sulfate conjugates as well as drugs that are not conjugated to any known endogenous compound. The human ABCB subfamily contains the P-glycoprotein (Pgp, MDR1), which is associated with the multidrug resistant phenotype in cancer cells, and the multidrug resistance-associated proteins (MRPs), which are involved in the transport of xenobiotics and are often upregulated in cancer cells that are resistant to chemotherapy. The human ABCC subfamily contains 9 genes, 2 of which (MRP1 and MRP2) are associated with the multidrug resistant phenotype in cancer cells. The human ABCC subfamily contains 3 members (MRP3, MRP4, and MRP5) that transport conjugated compounds as well as drugs that are not conjugated to any known endogenous compound. The human ABCG subfamily contains 1 gene (BCRP, breast cancer resistance protein), which is associated with the multidrug resistant phenotype in cancer cells. While the function of the remaining 1 0 human ABCG subfamily members is unknown, they are predicted to have 1 2 TMDs and 2 NBDs.
The nuclear exosome is involved in the degradation of aberrant nuclear RNAs and the processing of stable RNAs such as 5. 8S, 5S, and U4 / U6 and U1 2 snoRNAs. The nuclear exosome also plays a role in the degradation of mRNAs that are targeted for degradation by the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway and by the no-go decay (NGD) pathway. The nuclear exosome contains a 1 00-1 2 0kDa complex containing the putative RNA helicase Mtr4p and a smaller complex containing the putative RNA helicase Rrp6p. The nuclear exosome also contains a complex containing the putative RNA nucleases Rrp4 4p and Rrp4 5p. The nuclear exosome interacts with the Ski complex, which is involved in RNA surveillance and degradation and also with the poly (A) binding protein Pab1p. The interaction of the nuclear exosome with the Ski complex and Pab1p may stimulate the exonuclease activity of the nuclear exosome and / or target the exosome to specific RNAs. The interaction of the nuclear exosome with the decapping enzyme Dcp1p and the decapping activator Edc1p may also target the exosome to mRNAs for degradation.
DNA replication in eukaryotes is a highly conserved, multi-step process (replication fork movement) that begins with the binding of the Origin Recognition Complex (ORC) to replication origins in the chromosomal DNA. The ORC, along with Cdc6 / 18 and Cdt1, facilitates the binding of the Mcm2-7 complex to chromatin, and together these factors constitute the pre-replication complex (pre-RC). The binding of Cdc4 5 and the GINS complex to the pre-RC facilitates the formation of the pre-Initiation Complex (pre-IC). The activation of the pre-RC by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and the Cdc7-Dbf4 kinase (DDK) leads to the unwinding of the DNA at the origins and the recruitment of DNA polymerases and other factors to form the replication fork. The elongation phase of DNA replication requires the coordinated activities of DNA polymerases alpha, delta and epsilon. Pol alpha-primase synthesizes a short RNA-DNA primer that is extended by Pol delta to form the lagging strand, and then Pol epsilon elongates this strand. The leading strand is synthesized by Pol epsilon. The coordination of the leading and lagging strand DNA polymerases is essential for the accurate and efficient replication of the genome.
The spliceosome is a complex of five snRNPs (small nuclear ribonucleoproteins) and over a hundred polypeptides that catalyzes the excision of noncoding sequences (introns) from precursor mRNAs and the ligation of exons to form the mature mRNA that is transported to the cytoplasm for translation. The spliceosome is a dynamic structure and undergoes significant compositional change as it proceeds through the splicing cycle. The spliceosome is formed on the 5'splice site by the recognition of the 5 'splice site by the U1 snRNP, the U2AF complex and the SF1 / BBP protein. The U2 snRNP binds to the branch point sequence and interacts with the SF1 / BBP and the U2AF complex. The U4 / U6.U5 tri-snRNP is then recruited to the spliceosome to form the precatalytic complex or complex A. Complex B undergoes a series of rearrangements to form the catalytically active complex C and is subsequently released. The splicing reaction is catalyzed by the spliceosome-associated RNA helicase Prp2.
The proteasome is a multi-subunit protease complex that degrades proteins that are tagged with ubiquitin. The function of the proteasome is to degrade damaged or improperly translated proteins and to regulate the level of proteins in cells. The proteasome also plays a role in the immune response by degrading proteins that are presented on the cell surface as part of antigen processing. The core protease of the proteasome is a 20S proteasome, formed from four rings each with 14 subunits stacked on top of each other. The PA700 regulatory complex is stacked on the ends of the cylindrical 20S proteasome to form a 26S proteasome. Proteins that are tagged with ubiquitin are recognized and bound by the regulatory subunits, then unfolded in an ATP-dependent manner, and inserted into the core particle, where proteases degrade the protein, releasing small peptides and releasing the ubiquitin intact. The PA28 regulatory complex is alternative regulatory complex that appears to play a role in antigen processing.
The targeting of proteins to mitochondria requires the action of a mitochondrial import machinery. The majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded in the nucleus and are translated in the cytosol. The targeting of these proteins to mitochondria is mediated by N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequences or presequences. The mitochondrial protein import machinery consists of the translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (TOM) and the translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane (TIM). The TOM complex is the initial site of protein recognition and translocation and is composed of the channel-forming protein Tom4 0 and several receptor proteins, Tom2 0, Tom7 0, and Tom2 2. The TIM2 3 complex is involved in the import of proteins with internal targeting sequences or hydrophobic transmembrane domains and is composed of at least three proteins, Tim2 3, Tim1 7, and Tim5 0. The mitochondrial signal recognition particle (SRP) and its receptor (SR) are involved in the targeting of proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and to the bacterial plasma membrane. In both cases, the SRP recognizes the N-terminal signal sequence of nascent membrane proteins emerging from the ribosome and targets them to the SRP receptor in the ER or the plasma membrane. The interaction of the SRP with its receptor triggers the binding of the ribosome to the translocon, and the insertion of the nascent polypeptide chain into the lipid bilayer. In mitochondria, the SRP is not involved in the targeting of proteins to the mitochondrial membrane, but is required for the assembly of the respiratory chain. The SRP receptor in mitochondria (FSrp) is homologous to the SR in the ER (FtsY) and is essential for cell viability. Deletion of the FSRp gene in yeast results in the loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential and cell death. The essential role of the mitochondrial SRP receptor in yeast indicates that the SRP is not involved in the targeting of proteins to the mitochondrial membrane, but is required for another, as yet unknown, process.
The majority of fatty acids that are absorbed from the diet are absorbed in the small intestine and are transported to the liver for further metabolism and storage. The liver plays a central role in the metabolism of fatty acids because it is the major site of fatty acid synthesis and the major site of fatty acid oxidation. The liver also plays a central role in the metabolism of lipoproteins. The secretion of very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) by the liver is the major pathway by which fatty acids are transported to tissues. The composition of VLDL is influenced by the fatty acid composition of the diet and the activity of the fatty acid oxidation pathway in the liver. When the activity of the fatty acid oxidation pathway is high, more fatty acids are oxidized and more VLDL is secreted by the liver. As the activity of the fatty acid oxidation pathway is reduced, the proportion of fatty acids that are transported in VLDL decreases and the proportion that is stored in adipose tissue increases. The composition of adipose tissue is also influenced by the activity of the fatty acid oxidation pathway in the liver. When the activity of the fatty acid oxidation pathway is high, more fatty acids are oxidized and more glycerol is released by triglyceride hydrolysis in adipose tissue to be transported to other tissues for energy. The oxidation of fatty acids in the liver is closely linked to the oxidation of carbohydrates. Fructose is an important source of energy for many animals, including humans, and is absorbed in the small intestine. Fructose is absorbed in the small intestine and transported to the liver where it is metabolized to produce glucose and fructose. Fructose is a very poor substrate for oxidation by itself but is converted to glucose by the enzyme ketohexokinase. Glucose is then transported to the liver and converted to pyruvate, which is oxidized to produce acetyl-CoA and carbon dioxide. In contrast, fructose is a good substrate for fatty acid oxidation. In humans, the liver does not express ketohexokinase and fructose is not directly converted to glucose in the liver. Fructose is first absorbed in the small intestine and then transported to the liver where it is converted to fructose 1-phosphate. The conversion of fructose to fructose 1-phosphate is the first step in the pathway that leads to the production of glucose. Fructose 1-phosphate is an excellent substrate for the glycolytic enzyme phosphofructokinase. The high concentration of fructose 1-phosphate in the liver compared with other tissues leads to the accumulation of fructose 1-phosphate and the inhibition of phosphofructokinase. This inhibition of phosphofructokinase prevents the further metabolism of fructose and leads to the production of fructose 1-phosphate rather than glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. Fructose 1-phosphate is a good substrate for the enzyme aldolase. The aldolase reaction produces glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which are both converted to pyruvate and acetyl-CoA in the next round of glycolysis. The accumulation of fructose 1-phosphate in the liver inhibits the further metabolism of fructose and leads to the accumulation of this compound in the liver. Fructose 1-phosphate is also a substrate for the enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase. The accumulation of fructose 1-phosphate in the liver inhibits the further metabolism of this compound and leads to the accumulation of this compound in the liver. The accumulation of fructose 1-phosphate in the liver inhibits the further metabolism of this compound and leads to the accumulation of this compound in the liver.
The base excision repair (BER) pathway corrects non-helix-distorting DNA damage that includes oxidation, alkylation, deamination and base loss. The first step in BER is the excision of the damaged base by a DNA glycosylase. The resulting apurinic / apyrimidinic (AP) site is then repaired by the coordinated actions of an AP endonuclease, a DNA polymerase, and a DNA ligase. There are several different DNA glycosylases in the human genome that remove specific bases to create the AP site. UNG (uracil DNA glycosylase) removes uracil from DNA, MPG (3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase) removes alkylated and deaminated bases, and OGG1 (8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase) removes oxidized guanine. An additional class of DNA glycosylases, the NEILs (endonuclease VIII-like), remove oxidized bases including thymine glycol and 5-hydroxyuracil. The AP site is recognized and cleaved by an AP endonuclease, APE1 in humans. The DNA polymerase that repairs the AP site in the first step of BER is either DNA polymerase beta (polB) or DNA polymerase lambda (polL). Both of these DNA polymerases are members of the X family of DNA polymerases. The final step in BER is the ligation of the repaired DNA by DNA ligase III (lig III) or DNA ligase I (lig I). The coordination of the activities of the DNA glycosylases, the AP endonuclease, the DNA polymerases, and the DNA ligases is essential for the completion of BER. This multi-step process is aided by a group of proteins known as the BER proteins. The X-ray repair cross complementing protein 1 (XRCC1) is a key component of the BER process. XRCC1 interacts with all of the proteins involved in BER, including the DNA polymerases, the DNA glycosylases, the AP endonuclease, and lig III. The presence of XRCC1 increases the activity and fidelity of all of the BER proteins. People with a mutation in the XRCC1 gene are prone to developing cancer and have been shown to be sensitive to ionizing radiation.
The nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway removes a broad range of DNA lesions including UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers and 6-4 photoproducts. The XPA protein plays a central role in this pathway. In addition to binding DNA damage, XPA interacts with the DNA repair proteins RPA, ERCC1, and XPF-ERCC1. These proteins act in concert to incise the damaged DNA strand and remove the damaged oligonucleotide. XPA also interacts with the transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) complex, which plays a central role in transcription as well as DNA repair. The interaction of XPA with both the DNA repair and transcription complexes of TFIIH suggests that XPA may play a role in the coordination of these two essential processes.
DNA polymerase δ is a key enzyme in eukaryotic DNA replication and repair. It is also involved in meiotic recombination and in the bypass of DNA lesions by translesion synthesis. The polymerase activity of DNA polymerase δ is associated with the Pol3 (catalytic subunit) and Pol3 1 (subunit of the Pol3 2 complex) proteins. Pol3 is a member of the B-family of DNA polymerases, which includes DNA polymerases involved in DNA repair and replication. Pol3 1 is a member of the Pol3 / Pol1 family of DNA polymerases, which includes DNA polymerases involved in DNA repair and recombination. The Pol3 2 complex is involved in the maturation of Okazaki fragments during DNA replication. In addition to the Pol3 and Pol1 proteins, DNA polymerase δ contains three additional polypeptides of relative molecular mass 1 2 0, 6 0 and 5 0 kDa. The 1 2 0 kDa polypeptide is the Pol3 2 subunit, which is encoded by the POL3 2 gene. The Pol3 2 subunit is essential for DNA replication in yeast and is also required for DNA polymerase activity of DNA polymerase δ. The p5 0 and p6 0 subunits are encoded by the POL3 and POL3 1 genes, respectively. The p6 0 subunit is a member of the AAA + family of proteins, which are involved in a variety of cellular processes. The functions of the p1 2 0 and p21 subunits of DNA polymerase δ are unknown. The association of the four subunits to form DNA polymerase δ is essential for its activity. The association of the four subunits to form DNA polymerase δ is a co-operative process. The association of the three subunits (Pol3, Pol1 and Pol3 2) is essential for DNA polymerase activity. The association of the fourth subunit (p5 0, p6 0 and p1 2) is required for the 3ʹ → 5ʹ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase δ. The 3ʹ → 5ʹ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase δ removes mispaired nucleotides that are inserted by DNA polymerase during DNA replication and repair. The 3ʹ → 5ʹ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase δ is also involved in the error-free repair of UV-induced DNA lesions.
Homologous recombination is a mechanism by which chromosomes are copied from a homologous DNA molecule and is used during meiosis to create new allelic combinations in the germ line. Recombination is initiated by the creation of a double-stranded break in the DNA, which is then repaired using the homologous chromosome as a template. The repair of this break is catalyzed by the RAD5 2 epistasis group of genes in yeast and their mammalian homologs. The products of this group of genes are involved in several different steps of recombination, including the creation of the break, strand exchange between the broken end and the homologous template, and the repair of the resulting junctions. The products of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes also play a role in recombination, in part through their interaction with the RAD5 1 protein. BRCA1 and BRCA2 appear to act as mediators of RAD5 1 activity, allowing RAD5 1 to perform its role in recombination once it has been recruited to the site of the break. Another member of this group of genes is RAD51, which encodes a protein with 3 0% identity and 5 0% similarity to the RAD5 1 protein. Rad51 is involved in the repair of radiation-induced DNA damage and is also involved in meiosis. Rad51 acts in a complex with Rad54 to perform these functions. Rad51 and Rad54 are members of a family of ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, which also includes the yeast proteins Rad6 and Ubc2. Like other members of this family, Rad51 and Rad54 form a thiol ester intermediate with ubiquitin and transfer the ubiquitin to a target protein. The target protein of Rad51 and Rad54 is unknown, but one of the targets of Ubc2 is Rad51 itself. The role of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in recombination may be to recruit Rad51 and Rad54 to the site of the break, allowing them to perform their role in recombination. In addition to playing a role in recombination, Rad51 and Rad54 are involved in the RAD6 postreplication repair pathway, which allows cells to tolerate DNA damage that would otherwise be lethal. ubc2 mutants are defective in both the postreplication repair pathway and in recombination, indicating that the two processes are closely linked.
The GTPase Ras plays a central role in cellular signaling in response to growth factor stimulation and other stimuli. Growth factor receptors and other cell surface proteins activate Ras in a process that is poorly understood. Ras activates several different signaling pathways that converge on transcription factors to regulate cellular proliferation and other responses. The best characterized pathway for Ras action is the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. The MAPK cascade includes the kinases RAF, MEK, and ERK (p21). The activation of ERK (p21) by growth factor receptors is more complex and involves additional factors. One important component is the adaptor protein Shc and Grb-2. Another is the guanine nucleotide exchange factor SOS. Once activated, Ras stimulates multiple downstream pathways. One of these is the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway. Another is the phospholipase A2 (PLA2) pathway. Ras stimulates both of these pathways in cultured cells. One of the consequences of the activation of phospholipase A2 is the production of lipid second messengers such as diacylglycerol and arachidonic acid. These are important activators of protein kinase C and the protein kinase cascade involving RAF, MEK and ERK. The relationship of these pathways to each other and to other aspects of Ras action such as the regulation of apoptosis is not yet clear. Another important substrate of Ras is the GTPase activating protein (GAP). The balance of Ras activity toward GAP and toward MEK and ERK is not yet known. The importance of this activity for Ras action is also not yet clear. Finally, the regulation of apoptosis by Ras is not yet clear. Although some reports indicate that Ras protects cells from apoptosis, other reports indicate that Ras promotes apoptosis. The role of Ras in apoptosis is not yet clear. The role of AKT in apoptosis is also not clear. Although AKT is a kinase that phosphorylates and inactivates the proapoptotic protein BAD, it does not appear to phosphorylate or inactivate the proapoptotic protein caspase-3. The role of other kinases that phosphorylate and phosphorylate BAD is not clear. The role of ERK in apoptosis is also not clear. The role of PP2A is not clear. Although it is not clear whether it is clear whether it is involved in apoptosis or is it is involved in the regulation of apoptosis?
The erbB family of receptors (EGFR, erbB-2, and erbB-3) and the neuregulin family of ligands (NRG-1 and NRG-2) play critical roles in development and disease. Overexpression or amplification of these receptors and ligands is associated with a poor prognosis in a variety of cancers. The erbB receptors and their ligands are members of a large receptor tyrosine kinase gene family that includes the insulin receptor and the IGF-1R. Binding of ligand induces receptor dimerization, autophosphorylation of the receptor, and phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules. The erbB receptors and their downstream signaling pathways interact with other signaling pathways to produce highly specific and integrated responses. This diagram is a simplification of the complex network of interactions. In many cases the interaction is not linear and the endpoint is dependent on the relative abundance of the various components.
Platelet Derived Growth Factor (PDGF) plays a key role in the development and function of the cardiovascular system and is involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. PDGF is a dimer of the A and B chains. The PDGF-AB dimer binds to two PDGF-BB receptors to stimulate cellular responses. The PDGF receptor is a tyrosine kinase and activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase stimulates three major signaling pathways. 1. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. The activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is required for the mitogenic action of PDGF and also plays a role in the regulation of cell shape. 2. Ras / Map kinase pathway. PDGF stimulates the Ras / Map kinase pathway and this pathway is also involved in the regulation of cell shape. 3. JAK / STAT pathway. PDGF stimulates the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT-1 and STAT-3 and this also plays a role in the regulation of cell shape.
Bone density is maintained by a balance of bone resorption by osteoclasts and bone formation by osteoblasts. The combination of hormones and growth factors that regulate bone density include parathyroid hormone (PTH), parathyroid hormone related protein (PTHrP), vitamin D, estrogen and glucocorticoids. The combination of these factors regulates the expression of several genes involved in bone density including the receptor for PTH (PTHR), the receptor for PTHrP (PPRHR), the vitamin D receptor (VDR), and the type 1 and type 2 collagen genes. TGF-b is also a key regulator of bone density and is known to regulate the expression of the TGF-b receptor, the TGF-b receptor ligand (TGF-b), and the type 1 and type 2 collagen genes. TGF-b signals via the type 1 and type 2 TGF-b receptor kinases and phosphorylates the transcription factor SMADs. The role of other transcription factors in bone density include the aristaless-related gene (ALR), the chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter region-binding protein (COUP-TF), the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family member c-Myc, and the winged helix-loop-helix (WHLH) family member hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3). The role of other transcription factors in bone density include the estrogen receptor (ER), the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-g), and the Friend leukemia virus integration site 1 (Fli-1). The role of other transcription factors in bone density include the paired box gene pair (PAX-5 and -6), the basic helix-loop-helix factor Meis-1, and the basic helix-loop-helix factor Meis-2.
Chemokine receptors in leukocytes respond to a variety of chemotactic factors to guide their migration to specific locations in the body. The chemokine receptors CCR5, CXCR4 and CCR2 are involved in the response of leukocytes to inflammation and infection. These receptors are also targets of therapeutic agents. The chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 are also the receptors for HIV infection. CCR2 is also involved in the response of leukocytes to inflammation and is a target of therapeutic agents. The ligands of these three receptors are small proteins with small amino acid differences that produce different conformations of the proteins and alter their activities. The structures of these three proteins are shown in a different box on the left side of the figure to show the different conformations of the proteins. The amino acids that alter the activities of the proteins are indicated by a red box. The amino acids that alter the activities of the proteins are indicated by a green box. The structures of the chemokine ligands are shown on the right side of the figure. The structures of the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 are shown in a different box on the left side of the figure to show their different conformations. The structures of the chemokine ligands are shown on the right side of the figure. The structures of the chemokine receptors and chemokine ligands are shown in a different box on the right side of the figure to show their different conformations. The structures of the chemokine receptors and chemokine ligands are shown in a different box on the left side of the figure to show their different conformations. The structures of the chemokine ligands are shown in a different box on the right side of the figure to show their different conformations. The structures of the chemokine receptors and chemokine ligands are shown in a different box on the right side of the figure to show their different conformations. The colors of the proteins and the arrows indicating their conformations are indicated above the graphs. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows. The arrows indicate the direction of the arrows.
The cell cycle is regulated by the interplay of many molecules. Key among these are the cyclins which are expressed and then degraded in a concerted fashion to drive the stages of the cell cycle. Cyclins combine with cyclin dependent kinases (cdks) to form activated kinases that phosphorylate targets that regulate the cell cycle. The cdk2 / cyclin A complex is involved in the G1 to S transition, the cdk1 / cyclin B complex is involved in the G2 to M transition and the cdk1 / cyclin A complex is involved in the maintenance of the mitotic state. The anaphase promoting complex (APC) is a multi-subunit ubiquitin ligase that is activated at specific times in the cell cycle to drive the stages of mitosis. The APC is activated by the Cdh1 protein during the G1 to S transition and by the Cdc2 0 protein during the G2 to M transition. The spindle assembly checkpoint prevents the onset of mitosis if the spindle is not properly attached to DNA. The checkpoint protein MAD1 binds to unattached kinetochores to prevent the formation of the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) which inhibits the APC. The MCC includes the proteins Mad2, Bub3 and BubR1. The APC is activated by the protein Cdc2 0 and then degrades the cyclins A and B, which are required to drive the cell cycle from G1 to M phase. The degradation of cyclin A releases cdk2 that is required to phosphorylate the replicated chromosomes to allow their segregation.
The G2 / M transition in the cell cycle is a key regulatory point in the cell cycle. The transition from G2 to M phase is regulated by the activation of the M-phase promoting factor (MPF), a heterodimer of cyclin B and the cyclin dependent kinase Cdc2. MPF is activated by the dephosphorylation of Cdc2 at threonine 161 and tyrosine 154. The activation of MPF triggers entry into mitosis. The phosphatase Cdc2 5C is responsible for the dephosphorylation of Cdc2 at these positions. The activation of MPF also leads to the phosphorylation of the phosphatase p21Cip1, which further activates MPF. The activity of Cdc2 5C is regulated by phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of Cdc2 5C on serine 2 1 4 and threonine 48 activates its phosphatase activity. The kinase that phosphorylates Cdc2 5C on these residues is not yet known. However, the current model suggests that the activation of the MPF cascade at the G2 / M transition is initiated by the activation of the M-phase promoting factor (MPF), which in turn is activated by the dephosphorylation of Cdc2 (threonine 161 and tyrosine 154). The phosphatase p21Cip1, which is associated with Cdc2, inhibits the activity of MPF and is also dephosphorylated by Cdc2 5C. The activation of MPF leads to the phosphorylation of cyclin B, which further activates the kinase. The phosphorylation of cyclin B and the inactivation of p21Cip1 cooperate to activate MPF.
The G2 / M DNA damage checkpoint prevents the cell from entering mitosis (M phase) if the genome is damaged. The Cdc2-cyclin B kinase is pivotal in regulating this transition. During G2 phase, Cdc2 is maintained in an inactive state by the kinases Wee1 and Mt1. As cells approach M phase, the phosphatase Cdc25 is activated, perhaps by the polo-kinase Pik1. Cdc25 then activates Cdc2, establishing a feedback amplification loop that efficiently drives the cell into mitosis. DNA damage activates the DNA-PK / ATM / ATR kinases, initiating two parallel cascades that inactivate Cdc2-cyclin B. The first cascade rapidly inhibits progression into mitosis: the CHK kinases phosphorylate and inactivate Cdc25, which can no longer activate Cdc2. The second cascade is slower. Phosphorylation of p53 causes it to interact with MDM2, which is followed by rapid degradation of p53. MDM2 also acts as a ubiquitin ligase for itself, and also for p53. The degradation of p53 precludes it from interacting with MDM2 and maintaining the active state of Cdc2-cyclin B.
The cell cycle is regulated by the interplay of many molecules. Key among these are the cyclins which are expressed and degraded in a concerted fashion to drive the cell cycle. Cyclins combine with and activate the cyclin dependent kinases (cdks). The activity of the cyclin-cdk complexes is opposed by the cdk inhibitors. The cdk inhibitors are expressed in a cell cycle dependent manner. The DNA is replicated in S phase and then repaired in G2 and M. The cell cycle is also regulated by the interplay of many molecules. Key among these are the cyclins. Cyclins are expressed and degraded in a concerted fashion to drive the cell cycle. Cyclins combine with and activate the cyclin dependent kinases (cdks). The activity of the cyclin-cdk complexes is opposed by the cdk inhibitors. The cdk inhibitors are expressed in a cell cycle dependent manner. The DNA is replicated in S phase and then repaired in G2 and M. The cell cycle is also regulated by the interplay of many molecules. Key among these are the cyclins. The cell cycle is regulated by the interplay of many molecules. Key among these are the cyclins.
The ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) GTPases are central regulators of membrane traffic in all eukaryotic cells. They were first recognized as essential components of the cholera toxin entry pathway in intestinal epithelial cells and subsequently shown to play a central role in the formation of transport vesicles in all secretory and endocytic pathways. The mammalian ARF family currently contains at least six members, Arf1-6. Like other GTPases, the activity of ARF is regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). GAPs stimulate the hydrolysis of bound GTP to GDP, and so are essential for the function of ARF. The discovery that the epsin proteins bind to clathrin and are involved in the formation of clathrin-coated vesicles at the plasma membrane suggested that other proteins might also be involved in the formation of clathrin-coated vesicles. The AP1 8 0 and clathrin assembly proteins were identified as potential epsin relatives and were shown to interact with each other and with clathrin. In addition to containing a clathrin-binding motif, these proteins also interact with phosphoinositides and with each other in a complex network of interactions. Another protein involved in the formation of clathrin-coated vesicles is dynamin. Dynamin is a GTPase that forms a ring around the neck of the forming vesicle. It is recruited to the membrane by interaction with ARF and with phosphoinositides. Once at the membrane, dynamin forms a helical structure around the vesicle neck and completes the formation of a vesicle. The action of dynamin is opposed by the GTPase amphiphysin. The formation of clathrin-coated vesicles is a key part of the cellular response to growth factor stimulation and is regulated by the tyrosine kinase receptors and the serine / threonine kinase receptors. The ephrins are transmembrane proteins that interact with the eph family of tyrosine kinase receptors. The interaction between ephrins and eph receptors is bidirectional. The binding of ephrins to eph receptors activates signaling cascades in the opposite membrane that are not initiated by ligand binding. The endocytosis of ephrins and their degradation in lysosomes appears to be one mechanism by which signaling is attenuated.
The biogenesis of peroxisomes in yeast and mammals is a complex process involving PEX genes encoding proteins involved in the import of proteins into the peroxisome, as well as PEX genes involved in the biosynthesis of the peroxisome membrane and in lipid metabolism. The proteins encoded by the PEX genes are required for the import of matrix proteins, and for the formation of the peroxisome membrane. In yeast, as in mammals, there are at least two redundant systems for the import of proteins into the peroxisome, and for the formation of the peroxisome membrane. The first system is specific for proteins with a peroxisome targeting signal (PTS) 1, and is encoded by the PEX genes. The second system is general and involves proteins with a PTS2. Proteins with a PTS1 are recognized by the cycling receptor Pex5p, while proteins with a PTS2 are recognized by the PTS2 receptor Pex7p. Both receptors bind to their cargo proteins in the cytosol, and are translocated into the peroxisome in a concerted manner. Once in the peroxisome, the proteins are folded, modified, and oligomerized before they are imported into the peroxisome. The membrane of the peroxisome is formed by the concerted action of at least 1 3 proteins, the PEX genes. Most of the PEX genes identified in yeast are also found in mammals. The products of the PEX genes involved in the formation of the peroxisome membrane are involved in the synthesis of phospholipids, in the biosynthesis of ether-phospholipids, and in the metabolism of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs). The products of the PEX genes involved in the import of proteins into the peroxisome are involved in the assembly of the peroxisomal matrix, and are classified into three groups based on their function. The first group includes proteins involved in the translocation of proteins into the peroxisome membrane. This group includes Pex2p, Pex5p, Pex7p, and Pex1 1p. The second group includes proteins involved in the docking of proteins into the peroxisome membrane, including Pex3p, Pex1 6p, and Pex1 9p. The third group includes proteins involved in the translocation of proteins into the peroxisome lumen, including Pex1p and Pex6p. There are also several PEX genes that play a role in more than one of the steps in peroxisome biogenesis. For example, Pex1 2p appears to play a role in both the formation of the peroxisome membrane and in the import of proteins. There are also PEX genes that play a role in more than one of the steps in peroxisome biogenesis. For example, the product of the PEX gene responsible for the Zellweger syndrome, Pex2p, plays a role in both the formation of the peroxisome membrane and in the import of proteins.
The role of phosphorylation in the regulation of apoptosis has been the subject of considerable recent research. This field has been greatly aided by the identification of a number of kinases that specifically phosphorylate apoptosis regulatory proteins and phosphatases that specifically dephosphorylate these proteins. The phosphorylation status of many of the key apoptosis regulatory proteins is controlled by a balance between the activities of protein kinases and protein phosphatases. The activities of these enzymes is themselves regulated by phosphorylation. This review will focus on the role of phosphorylation in the regulation of the balance between apoptosis and cell survival at the mitochondrial checkpoint. At this checkpoint, the balance between the proapoptotic protein Bad and the survival factor Bcl-xL determines whether the cell will live or die. Bad is a Bcl-2 family member that is phosphorylated on multiple sites in response to survival signals such as growth factor activation or integrin ligation. Phosphorylation of Bad leads to its inactivation and association with 14-3-3, resulting in the loss of Bcl-xL and the subsequent initiation of apoptosis. The protein kinase AKT / PKB acts at this checkpoint to phosphorylate Bad and to promote cell survival. The activity of AKT is stimulated by growth factor receptor activation and inhibits apoptosis. The phosphorylation of Bad by AKT blocks its interaction with Bcl-xL and promotes cell survival. In addition to blocking the interaction of Bad with Bcl-xL, AKT phosphorylation of the caspase 9 protease also inhibits apoptosis. The activity of caspase 9 is regulated by the interaction of its N-terminal region with the mitochondrial protein Apaf-1. When caspase 9 is activated by an apoptotic stimulus, it interacts with Apaf-1 and the protease cleaves itself and other cellular targets. The activity of caspase 9 is also regulated by phosphorylation. PKA, PKC and AKT phosphorylate caspase 9 on several sites, including serine 196, which is a major site of phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of caspase 9 by PKA or PKC inhibits its protease activity. The inhibition of caspase 9 activity by PKA or PKC is not mediated by a change in the affinity of caspase 9 for Apaf-1, but by an alteration in the affinity of the ATP binding site. The inhibition of caspase 9 activity by PKA or PKC may be a general mechanism by which phosphorylation regulates apoptosis.
Vasopressin is a key regulator of water and electrolyte homeostasis and blood pressure homeostasis. It is released by the hypothalamus in response to hyperosmolality or haemorrhage and binds to receptors in the renal proximal tubule to reduce sodium and water reabsorption. The signalling mechanism involves release of intracellular calcium, activation of PKC and inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. The response is specific to the V1a receptor and does not involve a rise in intracellular calcium ion concentration via the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. The response does not involve caveolin, G-protein subunits or nitric oxide release. The inhibition of adenylyl cyclase does not appear to involve PKA, PKG or Rho kinase. The response does not appear to involve inhibition of the membrane-bound form of guanylyl cyclase, but may involve inhibition of the soluble form of the enzyme. The response does not appear to involve inhibition of the nuclear pool of cGMP-dependent protein kinase, but may involve inhibition of the cytosolic pool. The response does not appear to involve inhibition of the nuclear pool of cGMP-dependent protein kinase.
Wnt family members are secreted glycoproteins who bind to cell surface receptors, the frizzled class receptors. Wnt members can play a role in the differentiation of many cell types. For example, Wnt-1 induces the differentiation of mammary epithelial cells. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of neuronal cells as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of skeletal muscle cells as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of adipocytes as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. For example, it plays a role in the differentiation of keratinocytes. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of osteoblasts as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-1 plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many cell types. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of chondrocytes as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of neuronal cells as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of skeletal muscle as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many other cell types as well. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-1. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-1. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-2. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-2. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-2. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-5. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-5. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-5. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-5. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-5. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-5. Wnt-3A plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-6. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-3. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-6. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-3. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-4. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation of many more cell types than Wnt-6. Wnt-5 plays a role in the differentiation
Presenilin is required for gamma-secretase activity that cleaves amyloid precursor protein (APP) and is involved in Notch signaling. Presenilin is also involved in gamma-secretase activity that cleaves other proteins such as ErbB4 and is involved in signaling by the transmembrane protein Delta. Presenilin is a component of gamma-secretase, a protease that cleaves transmembrane proteins. The active site of gamma-secretase is in the transmembrane domain of proteins such as APP, Notch, and ErbB4. Other proteins such as nicastrin, APH-1 and PEN-2 are also components of gamma-secretase. The function of presenilin is not known. One possibility is that presenilin is involved in transport of proteins through the membrane. Another possibility is that presenilin is involved in catalysis of a proteolytic reaction that cleaves proteins in the transmembrane region. The cleavage that releases the amyloid beta-peptide from APP is thought to play a role in the development of Alzheimers disease. The cleavage that releases the intracellular domain of Notch is involved in signaling by the transmembrane protein Delta during development. Presenilin is also involved in this signaling pathway. The intracellular domain of Notch moves into the nucleus to act as a transcription factor. The intracellular domain of Delta activates transcription by interacting with CSL (CBF1, Su (H), Lag-1) transcriptional repressors and coactivators such as Mastermind. Factors such as p300 and GCN5 that acetylate histones in the vicinity of the transcription factor are also involved in Notch signaling. The role of nicastrin in gamma-secretase activity and Notch signaling is not known. APH-1 and PEN-2 are components of gamma-secretase but are not required for gamma-secretase activity in vitro. Factors such as TMP2 1 and CD1 4 7 that interact with components of gamma-secretase may be involved in the assembly or transport of gamma-secretase components or in the regulation of gamma-secretase activity.
Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is one of a family of three secreted proteins, including Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) and Desert Hedgehog (Dhh), that play distinct and crucial roles in development. The morphogenic signal Shh provides in the developing CNS induces proliferation of neuronal precursor cells in the developing cerebellum and other tissues. Proliferative signaling by Shh is involved in the development of cancer, including specific brain and skin cancers such as basal cell carcinomas, while activation of Shh signaling in neurons may also provide a means to induce neuronal regeneration. Mitogenic Shh signaling does not appear to involve Map kinase pathways, but may involve induction of Cyclin D1 expression to maintain Rb in the hyperphosphorylated state and allow progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Activation of myc may be one mechanism by which Shh induces cell cycle progression. Activation of Shh proliferative signaling may not involve gene mutation, but may involve induction by growth factors such as bFGF and IGF-1 provided by surrounding stromal cells. Activation of Shh proliferative signaling may not involve gene mutation, but may involve induction by growth factors such as bFGF and IGF-1 provided by surrounding stromal cells. Hedgehog signaling may not involve gene mutation, but may involve induction by growth factors such as bFGF and IGF-1. Hedgehog signaling may not involve gene mutation. Hedgehog signaling may not involve gene mutation. Hedgehog signaling may not involve Gli transcription factors.
The TGF beta s are a large family of related cytokines that regulate growth and differentiation in a broad range of cells. The activities of the TGF beta s are regulated by extracellular binding proteins, including the binding protein called inhibin, which inhibits the activity of the TGF beta s to which it is bound. The TGF beta s signal through serine-threonine kinase receptors that are members of the GPCR gene family. Binding of the TGF beta s to the TGF beta receptor causes the assembly of a receptor complex that includes two types of serine-threonine kinase receptor. The type II receptor in the complex is activated by ligand binding and phosphorylates the type I receptor. The type I receptor in turn phosphorylates downstream signaling molecules called SMADs. In the case of the TGF beta 1 ligand, this includes the receptor associated SMADs, SMAD2 and SMAD3. These are phosphorylated by the type I receptor and then associate with the transcriptional regulator SMAD4. The SMAD complex then translocates to the nucleus to regulate the transcription of target genes. Some of the genes that are regulated by the TGF beta s include inhibins, which are hormones that block the activity of other TGF beta s. Other genes regulate growth such as the cell cycle regulator p27. Other genes regulate differentiation such as the matrix protein thrombospondin. The activity of the TGF beta s is also regulated by extracellular binding proteins. In addition to inhibin, which blocks the activity of the TGF beta s, are several proteins that bind the TGF beta s to alter their activity. The TGF beta 2 and TGF beta 3 are bound by the betaglycan receptor, which enhances signaling by these two TGF beta s. BMP-2 and BMP-4 are bound by the type II and type IA receptors, which also transmit signals for the TGF beta s, activin, and Mullerian inhibiting substance. Noggin binds to BMP-2 and BMP-4 to block signaling by these two TGF beta s. Thrombospondin is regulated by multiple factors including TGF beta, hypoxia, and integrin signaling.
The ephrins and their receptors, the ephrins-Eph kinases, are involved in a variety of developmental processes such as neuronal development, angiogenesis, and myogenesis. The ephrins are transmembrane proteins, with the ephrins on the cell surface and the Eph kinases on adjacent cells. The Eph kinases are a family of four receptors (Ephs) and one family of ligands (ephrins). There are two subfamilies of ephrins and Eph kinases based on their structure and binding affinity. The ephrins-Eph kinases bind with varying affinities and specificities. For example, binding of ephrin-A ligands to Eph kinases is generally stronger than binding of ephrin-B ligands to Eph kinases. Furthermore, the binding of ephrin-B ligands to Eph kinases is dependent on the subcellular localization of the ligands and the kinases. Binding of ephrins to Eph kinases can result in either activation (forward signaling) or inhibition (reverse signaling) of downstream pathways. Signaling is initiated by the clustering of ephrins and Eph kinases on the cell surface, which triggers the phosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues in the Eph kinases. The ephrins-Eph kinases interact with a variety of signaling systems including: G-protein coupled receptors, integrins, and transmembrane proteins such as CD4 4. Several signaling systems downstream of the ephrins-Eph kinases have been identified including: ras-mediated signaling, PI3 kinase, and Src family kinases. Several of the signaling systems downstream of the ephrins-Eph kinases overlap with those of the netrin-DCC and slit-robo pathways. The ephrins-Eph kinases also interact with several negative regulators of signaling such as protein phosphatase 1O and 3O. The expression of the ephrins and Eph kinases are tightly regulated during development, with some members of the family being expressed in a spatial and temporal manner to modulate signaling.
The activation of platelets is a key part of the clotting cascade and is also involved in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques. The release of platelet-activating factor (PAF) from activated platelets is one of the first responses of vascular endothelial cells to injury. PAF is a potent signaling molecule that activates platelets and is involved in inflammation and atherosclerosis. The release of PAF from activated platelets may stimulate further inflammation and vascular wall damage and may also stimulate the activation of platelets in the vicinity of the site of vascular injury. The intracellular signaling mechanisms that lead to the release of PAF from platelets and from endothelial cells are not yet clear. However, the activation of phospholipase A2 is a key step in the release of both PAF and arachidonic acid, the first step in the biosynthesis of prostaglandins and thromboxanes, two important signaling molecules involved in inflammation and blood clotting. The activity of phospholipase A2 is regulated by several factors, including calcium, protein kinase C and the phosphorylation state of the enzyme. The phosphorylation of phospholipase A2 by protein kinase C inhibits its activity, while dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase activates the enzyme. The activation of protein kinase C inhibits phospholipase A2 activity in platelets and endothelial cells stimulated with thrombin, while the inhibition of protein kinase C with staurosporine activates phospholipase A2 and increases the release of arachidonic acid and the production of thromboxane A2 in these cells. The activation of protein kinase C in platelets and endothelial cells stimulated with thrombin also inhibits the release of PAF, while the inhibition of protein kinase C with staurosporine activates phospholipase A2 and the production of PAF in these cells. The inhibition of protein kinase C with staurosporine also activates phospholipase A2 in platelets treated with the calcium ionophore A2 3 1 8 7, indicating that the inhibition of protein kinase C is not sufficient to activate phospholipase A2 in the absence of calcium. The activation of protein kinase C in platelets and endothelial cells stimulated with thrombin also inhibits the activation of the MAP kinase ERK, while the inhibition of protein kinase C with staurosporine activates ERK in these cells. The inhibition of ERK activation with the MEK inhibitor U0 1 2 6 also inhibits the activation of phospholipase A2 in thrombin-stimulated platelets, indicating that ERK activation is required for the activation of phospholipase A2 in these cells. The activation of protein kinase C in platelets and endothelial cells stimulated with thrombin also inhibits the activation of the transcription factor NFAT, while the inhibition of protein kinase C activates NFAT in these cells. The inhibition of protein kinase C also activates the transcription factor NF-AT, while the inhibition of protein kinase C inhibits NF-AT activation in these cells. The inhibition of NF-AT activation with cyclosporin A also inhibits the activation of phospholipase A2 in thrombin-stimulated platelets, indicating that NF-AT is also involved in the activation of phospholipase A2 in these cells. The activation of protein kinase C in platelets and endothelial cells stimulated with thrombin also inhibits the production of nitric oxide, another important signaling molecule involved in the regulation of platelet activation. The inhibition of nitric oxide production by protein kinase C may also contribute to the activation of platelets by these cells.
Integrins are cell surface receptors that interact with the extracellular matrix and mediate intracellular signals in response to the extracellular matrix including cell shape, mobility, and growth. Integrins do not themselves possess a kinase domain or enzymatic activity but rely on association with other proteins to transmit signals. Integrins do not act in isolation but form part of large protein complexes containing > 1 0 polypeptides in addition to the integrin heterodimer itself. The extracellular matrix is composed of > 3 0 different proteins that interact with each other to form the extracellular matrix. The extracellular matrix interacts with cells not just in the form of the extracellular matrix proteins but also through specific cell surface receptors called integrins. Integrins are a family of > 1 5 heterodimeric cell surface proteins that interact with > 1 4 different extracellular matrix proteins. There are > 1 4 different integrins that interact with the extracellular matrix. Each integrin heterodimer is formed by the noncovalent association of an alpha and a beta subunit. There are > 1 5 different integrin heterodimers formed by the combination of alpha and beta subunits that interact with > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. There are > 1 5 different integrin heterodimers formed by the combination of alpha and beta subunits that interact with the extracellular matrix. The combination of > 1 5 different integrin subunits results in > 1 5 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. There are > 2 0 different integrin heterodimers formed by the combination of alpha and beta subunits that interact with the extracellular matrix. The combination of > 1 5 different integrin subunits results in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. The combination of > 1 5 different integrin subunits results in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. The > 1 5 different integrin subunits results in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. The > 1 5 different integrin subunits result in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. The > 1 5 different integrin subunits result in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. The > 1 5 different integrin subunits result in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. The > 1 5 different integrin subunits result in > 2 0 different integrin receptors for > 3 0 different extracellular matrix proteins. In addition to the > 1 5 different integrin subunits, > 5 different polypeptides are required to form an integrin receptor. There are > 5 different polypeptides required to form an integrin receptor. Polypeptides required for integrin complex formation are called adaptors. Polypeptides required for integrin heterodimer formation are called alpha and beta subunits. There are > 1 0 polypeptides required to form an integrin receptor. Polypeptides required for integrin heterodimer formation are called alpha and beta subunits. There are > 5 different polypeptides required for integrin receptor formation.
Platelets are small, anucleate cells involved in clotting when activated. They are released from the bone marrow into the circulation when the body is damaged. The major receptors on the platelet surface involved in clotting are the integrins GPIIb / IIIa and GPIb / IX. These receptors bind to collagen and fibrinogen, respectively, to clot blood. The GPIb / IX complex is also the receptor for von Willebrand factor, a key component of clotting. The GPIIb / IIIa integrin is activated by thrombin, a protease released from the damaged blood vessel. Binding of these receptors to their ligands causes the platelets to aggregate and form a clot. The GPIb / IX complex is also involved in the response of platelets to vascular injury, binding to thrombin-cleaved von Willebrand factor and to the thrombin receptor PAR1. The GPIIb / IIIa integrin is found on the platelet surface as a heterodimer of GPIIIa and GPV. The genes for these three proteins have been identified and sequenced. The GPIb / IX complex is a heterodimer on the platelet surface as well. The GPV gene has not been identified. The GPIIIa gene has been shown to undergo alternative splicing to form two forms of the protein, Bk and Ia. The GPIb gene also undergoes alternative splicing to form two forms of the protein, GPV and IX. The GPIIb gene has been shown to undergo alternative splicing to form two forms of the protein, IIIa and 3b. The GPIIb / IIIa complex is formed in the megakaryocyte during biosynthesis. The GPIb / IX complex is formed in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The complex is then transported to the Golgi where further modification occurs. The complexes are then transported to the cell surface where they are inserted into the plasma membrane. The formation of the active GPIIb / IIIa complex occurs in the platelet at the platelet surface.
The brain is a complex organ with a highly specialized cellular composition. The trillions of neurons and the supporting glia cells that make up the brain must communicate with each other to carry out their complex functions. Cell adhesion is one of many means by which cells communicate. Cell adhesion is mediated by a variety of proteins expressed on the cell surface including integrins, cadherins, selectins, Ig superfamily members and others. Members of each of these protein families mediate adhesion by different mechanisms. For example, cadherins form bonds between cells through their extracellular domains, while integrins do so by binding to proteins in the extracellular matrix or to other cells. In addition to mediating adhesion, adhesion molecules also play a role in signaling. Members of the Ig gene family and integrins do not themselves possess intrinsic enzymatic activity, but interact with cytoplasmic proteins to transduce signals. Members of the cadherin family mediate adhesion by forming complexes with other adhesion molecules and with cytoskeletal elements. In addition to providing a means to communicate with each other, neurons require special adhesion molecules to form synapses. Nearly half of all synapses in the brain are formed between neurons that express CD28 and CD80, two T cell costimulatory molecules that are not found in other cells. CD28 and CD80 bind to each other in a 1: 1 complex that is required for them to function as costimulatory molecules in T cells. In addition to CD28 and CD80, synapses in the brain contain a member of the nectin gene family, nectin-1, that is also not found in other cells. Nectin-1 is a cell adhesion molecule with a single Ig domain that is similar in structure to CD28 and CD80. Like CD28 and CD80, nectin-1 is required for normal T cell activation. Like CD28 and CD80, nectin-1 is required for normal T cell activation, acting as a costimulatory molecule in conjunction with CD28 and CD80 and as a homophilic adhesion molecule. Nectin-1 is expressed at high levels in synapses between neurons, suggesting that it may also function as a synaptic adhesion molecule. In addition to acting as adhesion molecules, nectin-1 mediates cell entry by herpes simplex virus (HSV). Nectin-1 binds to the viral glycoprotein D (gD), a key viral adhesion molecule. Binding of gD to nectin-1 prevents entry of HSV into cells that express nectin-1, suggesting that the virus uses nectin-1 as a receptor during infection of the eye and that the same molecule may function as a receptor in the central nervous system.
Nectin cell adhesion molecule (NECTIN) is a calcium dependent cell adhesion molecule found in epithelial cells. It was first identified as a receptor for the herpes virus HSV-1 and it also binds to the adenovirus receptor CAR. It is a member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily and has an afadin binding site in its cytoplasmic domain. In addition to afadin, nectin has binding sites for the actin-binding proteins, vinculin and actinin, and also the PDZ domain-containing proteins ZO-1 and ZO-2. Nectin forms a trans-dimer in the cell membrane and this dimer interacts with afadin. In turn, afadin interacts with actin filaments and several actin-binding proteins to form a circumferential actin bundle at the site of cell-cell adhesion called a adherens junction. The nectin-afadin system also interacts with the cadherin-catenin system to form a tight junction-like structure, the apical circumferential actin belt, in epithelial cells. The nectin-afadin system is also involved in the formation of synapses in neurons. The tyrosine kinase activity of the rearranged during transfection (RET) receptor tyrosine kinase is involved in the formation of synapses with nectin. The association of nectin with afadin also appears to be involved in the signaling pathway of fibroblast growth factor (FGF). afadin is a member of the WASP family of proteins, which regulate actin cytoskeleton dynamics. The WASP proteins act as actin filament nucleators, while the verprolin, cofilin and acidic (VCA) region of the WASP proteins activate the actin-related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 and induce the formation of actin filaments. The activity of the WASP proteins is regulated by upstream signals from small GTPases of the Rho family, such as Rac, Cdc42 and Rho. The crystal structure of the verprolin, cofilin and acidic (VCA) region of WASP in complex with Rac-Cdc42 has revealed further insights into the regulation of the WASP proteins.
The tight junction is a specialized structure that regulates the passage of ions and molecules between cells in tissues and between cells in the lumen of organs such as the intestine. It is essential for the maintenance of cell polarity and for the prevention of mixing of cellular contents, and defects in its formation have been associated with cancer. The tight junction is a complex of proteins in the apical membrane of epithelial cells that forms a seal between cells, preventing the free diffusion of solutes. It also acts as a fence to restrict the movement of proteins and lipids between the apical and basolateral membranes. The proteins that make up the tight junction are classified into two groups: the integral membrane proteins that form the tight junction seal, and the associated proteins that regulate the function of the tight junction and are localized in the cytoplasm near the tight junction. The integral membrane proteins include occludin and the claudins, which are members of a large gene family. They are predicted to have four transmembrane domains, a short N-terminal domain in the cytoplasm, and a longer C-terminal domain that extends into the extracellular space. The claudins form a parallel array of proteins in the tight junction membrane that interact with proteins in the adjacent cell's plasma membrane to form the tight junction seal. Associated proteins include ZO-1, ZO-2, and ZO-3, which are members of a family of proteins that bind to the claudins and also interact with the actin cytoskeleton. The catenins (alpha, beta, and gamma) and cortactin also interact with the actin cytoskeleton and may help to regulate the function of the tight junction and other aspects of cell shape. The regulation of the assembly and disassembly of tight junctions is poorly understood, but may involve protein phosphorylation. The protein kinase C activator, phorbol ester, can induce the disassembly of tight junctions and the formation of vesicles containing tight junction proteins, apparently by phosphorylating occludin and ZO-1. The activation of the v-Src oncogene in epithelial cells causes the disruption of tight junctions and the formation of actin-rich structures called invadopodia, which may allow transformed cells to penetrate extracellular matrix and tissue barriers. Other proteins associated with tight junction regulation include cortactin, ZO-2, and ZO-3. Mutations in the genes for occludin and the claudin proteins have been associated with human disease, including deafness and renal tubular defects, respectively.
The dopamine D2 receptor is a GPCR found in the striatum where it is involved in movement, learning and memory. It is also found in other tissues such as the pituitary and retina. The dopamine D2 receptor is found in lipid rafts in the plasma membrane where it interacts with caveolin-1. This interaction is important for the receptor to function properly. The dopamine D2 receptor can form homodimers and heterodimers with the D3 receptor. The formation of the D2-D3 heterodimer does not alter ligand binding properties of the receptor but does alter downstream signaling. The dopamine D2 receptor can also form heterodimers with the D3 receptor and the D4 receptor. The D4 receptor can form homodimers as well. The formation of the D4-D2 and D4-D3 heterodimers may alter the pharmacology of the receptors in some tissues. The D4-D2 heterodimer may be involved in the cognitive and motor deficits observed in Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. Dopamine can also be formed from levodopa (L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) through the action of dopa decarboxylase in non-dopaminergic tissues such as the liver and kidney. Dopamine formed in these tissues may enter the blood stream and act on the dopamine D2 receptor in the brain to alter behavior. L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine is used to treat Parkinson's disease however it can also cause nausea and vomiting in some patients. In addition to dopamine, other catecholamines such as epinephrine and norepinephrine are formed from dopa. These catecholamines can also act on the dopamine D2 receptor to alter behavior. Epinephrine can act as a full agonist at the D2 receptor while norepinephrine is a partial agonist at this receptor.
The complement system is part of the defense against invading cells and is part of the immune response. It consists of about twenty different proteins found in the plasma that are involved in three different proteolytic cascades, the classical pathway, the alternative pathway and the lectin-induced pathway. These three systems converge in the formation of a C3 convertase that cleaves the C3 complement protein, leading ultimately to the formation of the membrane attack complex, MAC, a pore causing lysis of cells. The complement system also stimulates phagocytosis of foreign cells and an inflammatory response. There are several proteins that inhibit the complement system. Factor H is a negative regulator of the alternative pathway and also a cofactor for the inactivation of C3b by factor I protease. Factor I is a protease that only cleaves and inactivates C3b when bound by factor I. Disease-causing mutations have been identified in both factor H and factor I and in both cases these mutations result in a lack of functional protein. Disease-causing mutations have also been identified in the complement factor I receptor. C3 convertase is formed by the combination of C3b and factor B in the alternative pathway or C4b and factor B in the classical pathway. The complement receptor 2 (CR2, CD2 1) is a receptor for the complement factor C3d fragment and is expressed on the surface of B cells and follicular dendritic cells. Binding of C3d to CR2 increases the B cell response by recruiting cells to the B cell follicle and by increasing the proliferation and differentiation of B cells. Disease-causing mutations have been identified in both C3 and factor B that result in a lack of functional protein. In addition to providing a key role in the immune system, the complement system can be activated by damage to cells or tissues and can lead to inflammation and tissue damage. Uncontrolled complement activation can however also lead to damage to self tissues and this is prevented by a variety of inhibitors. Disease-causing mutations have been identified in several of the complement inhibitors. C1 inhibitor is mutated in patients with hereditary angioedema. Factor I is mutated in patients with a similar condition known as the Inborn Errors of Metabolism Morgani-genous Overabundance of C1 Inhibitor. Mutation of the complement protease C1r has also been identified in patients with a similar condition known as the Borderline Disease. The lack of control over complement activation can also lead to severe tissue damage in conditions such as ischemia / reperfusion injury and septic shock. In these cases the activation of the complement system is a result of the recognition of foreign cells by the immune system rather than an error in the immune system.
The innate immune response responds in a general manner to factors present in invading pathogens. Bacterial factors such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS, endotoxin), bacterial lipoproteins, peptidoglycans and also CpG nucleic acids activate innate immunity as well as stimulating the antigen-specific immune response. Viral factors such as single-stranded RNA and double-stranded RNA also stimulate the innate immune response. The response to these factors is triggered by recognition by the immune system of structural features that are distinct from those present in host cells. The Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that are involved in the recognition of microbial factors are also involved in the recognition of endogenous factors that are associated with damage to tissues or cells. The response to these factors is called "sterile inflammation" and is also triggered by recognition of structural features that are distinct from those present in host cells. The signaling pathways used by the TLRs to transduce responses to microbial factors are similar to those used by the IL-1 receptor to transduce responses to IL-1. The IL-1 receptor has an associated kinase, IRAK-1, that is activated by binding of IL-1 to the receptor and that activates downstream signaling pathways including the kinases MKK1 and MKK2 and the MAP kinases ERK1 and ERK2. The kinases in these pathways phosphorylate and activate the transcription factors NF-kB and AP-1, which are involved in the transcriptional activation of many genes involved in the immune and inflammatory responses. The kinases in the IL-1 signaling pathway are similar to those in the TLR signaling pathway, with the exception that the kinase that phosphorylates IRAK-1, TAK1, is not a member of the Map kinase family. Instead, TAB1 is a factor that binds to TAK1 and is required for TAK1 to phosphorylate and activate IRAK-1. The signaling pathway used by the IL-1 receptor is distinct from that used by the TLR receptors in that the kinase that phosphorylates and activates IRAK-1, IL-1 receptor kinase, is not a member of the JAK kinase family. Instead, the kinase Tyk2 is involved in this role and is recruited to the IL-1 receptor complex together with IRAK-1. Once activated, Tyk2 phosphorylates and activates IRAK-1. The signaling pathways used by the TLRs and the IL-1 receptor are similar to each other but are distinct from that used by the T cell receptor, which uses a different set of kinases to phosphorylate and activate NF-kB and AP-1. The factors that stimulate the innate immune response in response to microbial factors are also involved in the stimulation of the antigen-specific immune response. The costimulatory signal that is provided by antigen-presenting cells is required for T cells to become activated. This costimulatory signal is provided by cytokines such as IL-2 and IL-12 and also by costimulatory receptors such as CD14 and CD80 and CD15. CD14 and CD80 bind to the T cell receptor complex and activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. The activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is required for IL-2 and IL-12 to stimulate the T cell response and also activates AKT, a kinase that phosphorylates and activates NF-kB and CREB. The activation of AKT also inhibits the apoptotic response of T cells to these factors. The activation of toll-like receptors on antigen-presenting cells also provides a costimulatory signal that stimulates the T cell response. The stimulation of T cells by toll-like receptor ligands such as LPS activates NF-kB and other transcription factors involved in the activation of genes involved in the immune and inflammatory responses. The activation of toll-like receptors on antigen-presenting cells also provides a costimulatory signal that stimulates the T cell response. The costimulatory signal provided by toll-like receptor ligands such as LPS activates NF-kB and other transcription factors involved in the activation of genes involved in the immune and inflammatory responses. The activation of toll-like receptors on antigen-presenting cells also provides a costimulatory signal that stimulates the T cell response. The costimulatory signal provided by toll-like receptor ligands such as LPS activates NF-kB and other transcription factors involved in the activation of genes involved in the immune and inflammatory responses. The activation of toll-like receptors on antigen-presenting cells also provides a costimulatory signal that stimulates the T cell response. The costimulatory signal provided by toll-like receptor ligands such as LPS activates NF-kB and other transcription factors involved in the activation of genes involved in the immune and inflammatory responses.
The innate immune response provides a rapid response to invading pathogens without the need for gene rearrangement or clonal expansion of antigen-specific lymphocytes. The innate immune response includes recognition of conserved microbial components known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a class of PRRs that recognize conserved microbial components and trigger inflammatory responses. The intracellular nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing proteins (NODs) also recognize microbial components and trigger inflammatory signaling. Several studies have demonstrated that the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 are involved in the innate immune response as well. The chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 are expressed on macrophages and are involved in the migration of macrophages to inflammatory sites in response to inflammatory signals such as IL-1. Macrophages that express CCR5 exhibit enhanced phagocytotic activity and increased production of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha and IL-6. CXCR4-expressing macrophages exhibit enhanced chemotactic responses to the chemokine SDF-1 (stromal cell-derived factor-1) and increased production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. In addition to playing a role in the innate immune response, CCR5 and CXCR4 may also be involved in the pathogenesis of HIV infection. Macrophages that express CCR5 are more susceptible to HIV infection than macrophages that do not express CCR5. In addition, the presence of CXCR4 on macrophages may be involved in the transmission of HIV infection to T cells, since CXCR4 is a coreceptor for HIV entry into T cells. The role of CCR5 and CXCR4 in the pathogenesis of HIV infection and in the modulation of the innate immune response indicates that these receptors may be useful therapeutic targets for the treatment of inflammatory conditions and HIV infection.
The innate immune response provides a rapid response to invading pathogens that is independent of antigen presentation and is triggered by conserved microbial components known as pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). PAMPs are recognized by a set of germ line-encoded pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), including Toll-like receptors (TLRs), RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) and NOD-like receptors (NLRs). TLRs are expressed on the cell surface (TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, TLR6) or in endosomal vesicles (TLR3, TLR7, TLR8) and recognize microbial lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. The RLR family members RIG-I and Mda-5 detect viral RNA in the cytoplasm, while the NLR family member NOD2 detects bacterial peptidoglycan. Signaling by these receptors leads to the activation of NF-kB and the transcription of inflammatory cytokines and type I interferons. The interferon genes are among the first genes to be activated, through the coordinated action of transcription factors including NF-kB and IRFs. Secreted interferon binds to a heterodimeric receptor on neighboring cells to induce the expression of a large set of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) through the JAK / STAT pathway. The products of these ISGs then mediate a broad anti-viral response, including the inhibition of viral replication. The importance of interferon in the innate immune response is demonstrated by the fact that many viruses have evolved mechanisms to block interferon signaling or its downstream effects.
The innate immune response responds in a general manner to all foreign nucleic acids, whether they are viral, bacterial, or eukaryotic. The response includes the induction of interferon and other cytokines, and the activation of antigen-specific immunity. The induction of interferon is particularly important for the activation of the acquired immune response and includes the induction of B cells to produce antibodies and T cells to become cytotoxic T cells. The response to RNA includes the induction of interferon and other cytokines and also the activation of antigen-specific immunity. The response to DNA includes the induction of interferon and other cytokines and also the activation of antigen-specific immunity. The induction of interferon and other cytokines by RNA and DNA is triggered by the recognition of these molecules by cellular receptors. The recognition of RNA is mediated by the RNA-dependent protein kinase PKR, which is induced by interferon and which is activated by binding to double-stranded RNA. PKR phosphorylates and inactivates the translation factor elF2a, blocking protein synthesis and inhibiting viral replication. Another protein activated by dsRNA to induce interferon is the transcription factor IRF3. IRF3 is retained in the cytosol in an inactive form, but is activated by phosphorylation to enter the nucleus and activate interferon gene transcription. DNA viruses and some bacteria activate interferon through the Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) in the endosome, activating NF-kB and other transcription factors through the adaptor protein MyD8 8. DNA viruses and some bacteria activate interferon also through an alternative pathway that involves the protein DAI (DNA activator of interferon regulatory factors). DAI is a member of the IFN-inducible gene family, including the protein IFI1 6, which also activates interferon when overexpressed. DAI and IFI1 6 activate interferon when bound to DNA, and activate NF-kB and other transcription factors when overexpressed, activating transcription factors like IRF3 and NF-kB and inducing interferon. The signaling pathways activated by RNA and DNA are similar to that of the immune response to microbial pathogens, involving Toll-like receptors and the interferon response factor IRF3 and NF-kB, and are called innate immunity. The activation of interferon and other cytokines by RNA and DNA is also called acquired immunity. The activation of interferon and other cytokines by RNA and DNA is also involved in the response to infection by viruses and other pathogens.
The common gamma chain (γc) is a subunit of several cytokine receptors including IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9 and IL-15. The IL-2 receptor is a multi-subunit complex and includes the IL-2 receptor alpha chain (IL-2RA) and the γc. The IL-2 receptor complex activates multiple signaling pathways. JAK1 and JAK3 kinases are activated by the IL-2 receptor and phosphorylate the IL-2RA tyrosine residues that serve as binding sites for the adaptor molecules Shc, Grb2 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase, SOCS-3. SOCS-3 binds to the IL-2RA and inhibits further JAK1 kinase activity. The IL-2RA also serves as the binding site for the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1. The IL-2RA also serves as the binding site for the STAT5 transcription factors. The importance of the γc in immune function is demonstrated by the severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) associated with mutation of the gene.
The function of platelets is to provide a semi-permeable barrier between the blood and the tissues, forming a clot at the site of vascular injury. The production of platelets is tightly regulated, with a half-life of approximately 10 days. The majority of platelets are produced in the bone marrow from megakaryocytes, polyploid cells derived from hematopoietic stem cells. The development of megakaryocytes is regulated by a combination of cytokines, with thrombopoietin (TPO) being the most important. TPO binds to its receptor on the surface of a megakaryocyte, inducing a proliferative response. The TPO receptor is a member of the cytokine receptor gene family, associated with JAK kinases. The TPO receptor is present on the surface of all platelets, even those with a low ploidy (2N-4N). The low level of TPO on the platelet surface may be important for the maintenance of a constant platelet count.
Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes distinct from B and T cells that provide innate immune responses to viral infection and that can directly kill tumor cells. NK cell receptors stimulate perforin-mediated lysis of target cells and the release of perforin-perforin aggregates to induce apoptosis in other cells. The receptors that stimulate NK cell activity include proteins on the cell surface (activating receptors) and proteins in the extracellular matrix (ECM). The most well-characterized activating receptor on NK cells is NKG2D (natural-killer group 2, member D), a type II transmembrane protein with a C-type lectin domain. Other well-characterized activating receptors on NK cells include NKp4 6, NKp4 4, and CD1 6 (FcRIII). Other proteins on NK cells that contribute to activation include CD9 4 / NKG2 and leukocyte-function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). Integrins also play a role in NK cell activation, with LFA-1 mediating adhesion to target cells and CD2 as a costimulatory receptor. The activity of NK cells is regulated by a balance of activating and inhibitory signals. Inhibitory receptors prevent NK cell activation by binding to self-proteins. The best-characterized NK cell inhibitory receptor is KIR (killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor), which binds to MHC-1 with a > 9 0% sequence identity in the peptide binding groove. When bound to MHC-1, KIR phosphorylates STAT-5 and SHP-1 / 2 to transduce an inhibitory signal. Other proteins involved in the inhibition of NK cell activation include CD3zeta, LAT, and SLP-76.
The T Cell Receptor plays a key role in the immune system. The specificity of the receptor is governed by the binding site formed from the mature alpha and beta chains (shown here) or gamma and delta chains in gamma / delta T Cells. It is the ability of this receptor to bind a complex of foreign peptide in the groove of an MHC molecule that leads to T cell activation. Upon activation the T cell can assist in activating other cells or carry out cytolytic attacks depending on the particular T cell type. The CD3 complex and CD4 (Th cells) or CD8 (Tc cells) work to transmit the activation signal to the T cell's transcriptional machinary upon engagement of the receptor.
The B-cell receptor plays a key role in the immune system. It is required for the maturation and activation of B cells and is also involved in the response of B cells to antigens. The mature B cell receptor is a heterodimer with a membrane immunoglobulin (mIg) and a heterodimer of Ig-alpha and Ig-beta. The cytoplasmic domain of Ig-alpha contains a sequence that interacts with the protein tyrosine kinase Syk and two copies of the adaptor protein BLNK. Interactions with Syk and BLNK lead to the phosphorylation of Ig-alpha and the recruitment of additional signaling proteins to the receptor complex. The phosphorylation of Ig-alpha creates binding sites for the adaptor proteins Grb2 and Shc and for the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) catalytic subunit. The activity of PI3K is required for B cell receptor signaling. The role of PI3K in B cell receptor signaling is not yet clear, but may include the recruitment of other signaling factors to the receptor complex. The activation of PI3K at the plasma membrane leads to the production of PIP3 in the membrane that attracts AKT / protein kinase B to the membrane. AKT is a kinase that phosphorylates several targets and that may play a role in B cell receptor signaling. The role of other proteins in B cell receptor signaling that interact with the Ig-alpha cytoplasmic domain include the CD72 and CD19 molecules. These molecules are required for B cell development and are associated with the Ig-alpha cytoplasmic domain in B cells. Mice lacking CD72 or CD19 have reduced numbers of B cells and do not respond to antigen due to a defect in the B cell receptor. CD72 and CD19 interact with each other and with the Ig-alpha cytoplasmic domain in B cells. The role of CD72 and CD19 in B cell receptor signaling is not yet clear. The function of the Ig-alpha cytoplasmic domain is also not yet clear. It is required for the maturation and activation of B cells and is associated with the protein tyrosine kinase Syk and the adaptor proteins BLNK and Grb2. Proteins that interact with the Ig-alpha cytoplasmic domain in B cells include the CD72 and CD19 molecules and the protein tyrosine kinase Syk. The role of PI3K in B cell receptor signaling is not yet clear, but may include the recruitment of other signaling factors to the receptor. The role of the Ig-alpha cytoplasmic domain is not yet clear. It is required for the maturation and activation of B cells and is associated with the protein tyrosine kinase Syk and the adaptor proteins BLNK and Grb2.
The Fc Epsilon Receptor 1 signaling pathway in mast cells uses multiple core signal path to achieve its necessary ends. Through the BTK protein and PKC Mast cells are able to degranulate, through the PKC and MAPK paths the cells are able to alter cytokine expression and arachidonic acid release.
The Fc gamma receptor is a key component of the immune response and is found on the surface of macrophages, neutrophils, and other cells. The Fc gamma receptor is activated by binding IgG in immune complexes. The Fc gamma receptor is involved in phagocytosis of foreign bodies, activation of B cells, and NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity. The Fc gamma receptor is also involved in the release of inflammatory factors such as histamine and prostaglandins. The Fc gamma receptor is a heterodimer with a ligand-binding subunit (Fc gamma RI) and a signaling subunit (Fc gamma RII or Fc gamma RIII). The Fc gamma receptor can couple to multiple signaling pathways. The Fc gamma receptor can associate with several signaling proteins including the src family kinases (Hck, Fgr, and Lyn) and the tyrosine kinase Syk. In addition the Fc gamma receptor can associate with the transmembrane protein LAT. Interaction of the Fc gamma receptor with LAT leads to activation of the MAP kinase pathways and calcium release. The vav gene encodes a protein with a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) domain that activates the Rho family of GTPases (Rac, Rho, and Cdc42). The Crk and CrkL adaptor proteins bind to the phosphorylated tyrosine residues on the Fc gamma receptor and also interact with other signaling proteins. The p21 proteins (also called RAC1-activated kinases or RACKs) interact with the Crk and CrkL proteins and also interact with the Rho GTPases. The p21 proteins activate the DOCK2 protein and also stimulate the activity of Rac. The activation of Rac leads to changes in the actin cytoskeleton and changes in membrane trafficking. The activation of the MAP kinase pathways by the Fc gamma receptor leads to transcriptional activation in addition to changes in the cytoskeleton and membrane trafficking.
Cell to cell adhesion is essential for a range of functions including the formation of tight junctions between epithelial cells, the formation of endothelial cell junctions and the formation of synapses between lymphocytes. Cell to cell adhesion is mediated by a range of cell surface molecules including cadherins, integrins and members of the immunoglobulin gene family. E-cadherin is involved in the formation of tight junctions between epithelial cells. The interaction of E-cadherin with catenin family members (beta-catenin, plakoglobin and alpha-catenin) in the cytoplasm and the actin cytoskeleton provides a strong link between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton. The clustering of cadherins on the cell surface induces the activation of Rac and the formation of lamellipodia. Rac activation also stimulates the formation of focal adhesions, which are integrin-based structures that interact with the extracellular matrix and that contain proteins such as paxillin and vinculin that regulate actin assembly. The clustering of cadherins also induces the activation of Rho, which promotes the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions. The activation of Rho, Rac and Cdc42 by cadherin engagement is important for the formation of tight junctions and focal adhesions respectively. The clustering of integrins on the cell surface induces the formation of focal adhesions and the activation of several protein tyrosine kinases including Src and Pyk2. Paxillin and Crk are recruited to sites of integrin engagement and serve as a scaffold for the assembly of signaling complexes that activate Rho, Rac and Cdc42 and that regulate actin assembly and cell spreading. Src and Pyk2 also phosphorylate the cadherin-catenin adhesion complex to further modulate adhesion. In addition to regulating adhesion between cells, Rac and Rho also play important roles in the response of cells to changes in the extracellular matrix. Rac-1 activation induces the formation of lamellipodia in response to a change in the extracellular matrix, while Rho activation induces the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions and inhibits the formation of lamellipodia. The response of cells to changes in the extracellular matrix is important for a range of functions including the migration of cells during development and the response of lymphocytes to antigen challenge.
For a T cell to be activated by a specific antigen, the T cell receptor must recognize complexes of MHCI with the antigen on the surface of an antigen-presenting cell. T cells and the T cell receptor do not respond to antigen in solution, but even for the specific antigen they only respond to antigen-MHC-1 complexes on the cell surface. This interaction is necessary for T cell activation, but it is not sufficient. T cell activation also requires a co-stimulatory signal involving interaction of CD28 on the T cell with CD80 or CD86 (B7 family genes) on the antigen-presenting cell. CD28 activates a signal transduction pathway acting through PI-3K, Lck and Grb-2 / ITK to provide its co-stimulatory signal for T cell activation. Another means to control T cell activation is by expressing factors that down-regulate T cell activation. Signaling by TNF receptor 13b (CD29) induces expression of Fas ligand by T cells, inducing apoptosis of activated T cells that express Fas. Fas-mediated T cell deletion may be one mechanism to prevent inappropriate and hazardous T cell activation.
The N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) glutamate receptor is a key mediator of excitatory neurotransmission in the central nervous system and is involved in a variety of physiological processes such as learning and memory. Overstimulation of the NMDA receptor can lead to neuronal cell death, a process termed excitotoxicity. This receptor is also involved in the response of neurons to hypoxic / ischemic stress. The NMDA receptor is a ligand-gated ion channel that is activated by the neurotransmitter glutamate and is blocked by the drug memantine. The response of the NMDA receptor to glutamate is regulated by a variety of factors including the concentration of magnesium ions (Mg + +) in the channel pore. During synaptic transmission, the concentration of Mg + + in the channel pore is high enough to block the flow of ions. During prolonged stimulation, however, the concentration of Ca + + in the cytoplasm of the postsynaptic neuron falls, reducing the block by Mg + + and allowing the flow of Ca + + into the cell. This increase in intracellular calcium activates several signaling pathways that regulate the NMDA receptor and other synaptic proteins. One of these pathways involves the phosphorylation of the NMDA receptor by protein kinase C (PKC). PKC phosphorylates the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor at two sites that reduce the block by Mg + +. This process is reversible, however, and after prolonged stimulation the block by Mg + + is restored by an as yet unidentified mechanism. Other pathways regulate the NMDA receptor indirectly through the activation of second messenger systems. For example, the activity of the NMDA receptor is inhibited by dopamine D2 receptors in a manner that involves G-protein coupled inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. Activation of dopamine receptors also inhibits the influx of Ca + + into neurons through voltage-dependent calcium channels. This pathway may play a role in the neuroprotective effects of dopamine receptor agonists.
The role of nerve growth factor in the development and maintenance of the nervous system has been well established. NGF plays a role in the survival and maintenance of neurons. NGF also plays a role in the function of neurons. NGF plays a role in pain signaling in response to injury. The role of NGF in pain signaling in response to injury may be due to its role in the function of sensory neurons. The role of NGF in the survival and maintenance of neurons may be due to its role in the maintenance of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. The role of NGF in pain signaling in response to injury may be due to its role in the maintenance of spinal cord neurons. The signaling mechanism for NGF in pain signaling in response to injury is not known. NGF binds to two receptors, TrkA and the pan-neurotrophin receptor, p7 5NTR. The binding of NGF to TrkA leads to the activation of NGF signaling while the binding of NGF to p7 5NTR does not result in the activation of NGF signaling. However, the binding of NGF to the p7 5NTR and TrkA leads to enhanced NGF signaling. The binding of NGF to the TrkA receptor leads to the activation of several signaling pathways. NGF activates p44 / 42 MAP Kinase. NGF also activates p90RSK. NGF activates PI3 kinase. NGF activates NF-kB. The activation of p44 / 42 MAP Kinase, p90RSK and NF-kB contributes to the role of NGF in the survival and maintenance of neurons. NGF activates PI3 kinase. The activation of PI3 kinase does not appear to play a role in the activation of NF-kB by NGF. The role of NGF in pain signaling in response to injury is not known. The role of NGF in the maintenance of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons and in pain signaling in response to injury may be due to the activation of similar signaling pathways.
The release of glutamate from presynaptic neurons activates postsynaptic iGluRs, primarily the AMPA and NMDA subtypes, and mGluRs in the postsynaptic density. The activation of iGluRs and mGluRs stimulates the release of Ca2 + from intracellular stores through the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (InsP3R). The increase in intracellular Ca2 + activates PKC and CaMKII, and these kinases in turn activate Ras and Rap1, which converge on B-Raf to stimulate the MAPK pathway. The activation of Ras and Rap1 also stimulate the PI3 kinase pathway. The activation of B-Raf stimulates the MEK-ERK cascade to phosphorylate CREB and Elk-1, and thereby activate transcription. The stimulation of Elk-1 contributes to the transcriptional activation of immediate early genes such as c-fos, whereas the activation of CREB contributes to the transcriptional activation of genes such as junB and fosB. The induction of immediate early genes by neurotransmitters plays a key role in the modification of synaptic strength and the formation of long-term memory. The activation of B-Raf by glutamate receptors may play a role in these processes.
The odours we perceive in our nose are created by the action of proteins in the microvilli of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) in the nose. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are Olfactory Receptors (ORs), Adenylate Cyclase (AC), G-protein α-subunit (Gα), and Calmodulin (CaM). The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, AC, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, AC, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and Gα. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are OR, Gα, and CaM. The proteins in the microvilli of ORNs are not. The proteins in the microvilli of odododododododododododododododododododododododododododododod
Skeletal muscle atrophies with disuse while with increased use and increased load skeletal muscle exhibits hypertrophy. One signaling pathway that contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy is the AKT / mTOR pathway. The mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy in response to increased use through increased translation. The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy through activation of the translation of mRNAs that are poorly translated under basal conditions. The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by at least two mechanisms. One mechanism is through activation of the ribosomal protein S6 kinase. The S6 kinase phosphorylates the protein S6, which in turn stimulates the translation of mRNAs with a 5 ′ terminal oligopyrimidine tract that are encoded by genes that are associated with muscle hypertrophy. The AKT / mTOR pathway also contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy through activation of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF-4E). The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by at least two mechanisms. One mechanism is through activation of eIF-4E. The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by at least two mechanisms. One mechanism is through activation of eIF-4E. The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by increasing the association of eIF-4E with its cofactor eIF-4G. The eIF-4E complex is a key regulatory point in the initiation of translation and is regulated by the availability of the small GTPase eIF-4G. Another mechanism by which the AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy is through inhibition of the translational repressor p4EBP. The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by at least two mechanisms. One mechanism is through phosphorylation of p4EBP. The phosphorylated form of p4EBP is no longer able to bind to and repress the translation of eIF-4E. The second mechanism by which the AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy is through inhibition of the translational repressor p70S6K. The AKT / mTOR pathway contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by at least two mechanisms. One mechanism is through phosphorylation of p70S6K. The phosphorylated form of p70S6K contributes to skeletal muscle hypertrophy by increasing the translation of mRNAs that are poorly translated under basal conditions.
The decapeptide gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) is the master regulator of reproduction in all vertebrates. GnRH is secreted by the hypothalamus, and stimulates the release of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) from the pituitary. GnRH is the key regulator of the reproductive cycle and is the key drug used to treat sex steroid dependent diseases such as breast and prostate cancer. The GnRH receptor is expressed in high levels in the pituitary and is also found in many other tissues including cancer. The receptor is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR), activating the G-protein Gq upon binding GnRH. The GnRH receptor also signals through a pertussis sensitive G-protein, Gi, although this is not required for GnRH action at the pituitary. One of the key actions of GnRH in the pituitary is to stimulate the synthesis and release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH in vivo. In vitro, GnRH stimulates the release of LH, but not FSH, from pituitary cells. In vivo, GnRH stimulates the synthesis and secretion of both LH and FSH. The lack of FSH in vitro has been traced to the presence of follistatin, a protein in the anterior pituitary that binds to and neutralizes activin. Activin stimulates the expression of the FSH beta subunit, while GnRH inhibits this expression. GnRH also stimulates the synthesis of both LH and FSH at the transcriptional level. The GnRH receptor is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR), activating the G-protein Gq upon binding GnRH. The GnRH receptor also signals through a pertussis sensitive G-protein, Gi, although this is not required for GnRH action at the pituitary. One of the key actions of GnRH in the pituitary is to stimulate the synthesis and release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the expression of both LH and FSH. LH and FSH are released by the pituitary in response to GnRH. While GnRH stimulates the expression of both LH and FSH beta subunits, it inhibits the expression of the alpha subunit required for heterodimer formation. As a result, GnRH stimulates the release of LH but not FSH. AL F S W IN JAPAN, WE FOUND THE JOUDY WORK ON THE GONADOTROPHIN RECEPTOR (GnRH). GnRH is the master regulator of reproduction in all vertebrates. GnRH is the key regulator of the reproductive cycle and is the key drug used to treat sex steroid dependent diseases such as breast and prostate cancer. GnRH is the key regulator of the key bot rover. GnRH is the key regulator of the release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. GnRH stimulates the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. While GnRH stimulates the expression of both LH and FSH beta subunits, it inhibits the expression of the alpha subunit required for heterodimer formation. As a result, GnRH stimulates the release of only the mature hormones LH and FSH. GnRH binds to the GnRH receptor in the pituitary to stimulate the release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH is the master regulator of the reproductive cycle and is the key drug used to treat sex steroid dependent diseases such as breast and prostate cancer. GnRH is the key regulator of the release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH is the key master regulator of the reproductive cycle and is the key drug used to treat sex steroid dependent diseases such as breast and prostate cancer. GnRH is the key master regulator of the pituitary. GnRH is the key master regulator of the release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH is the key master regulator of the synthesis of LH and FSH. GnRH is the key master regulator of the synthesis of LH and FSH. GnRH binds to the GnRH receptor in the pituitary to stimulate the release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. GnRH binds to the GnRH receptor in the pituitary to stimulate the synthesis and release of both LH and FSH. GnRH is the key master regulator of the synthesis of LH and FSH. GnRH is the key master regulator of the synthesis of glycoprotein hormones LH and FSH. GnRH binds to the GnRH receptor in the pituitary to stimulate the expression of the alpha subunit required for heterodimer formation. GnRH also stimulates the expression of the LH and FSH beta subunits.
The G2 to M phase transition of the cell cycle is a key regulatory point in the cell cycle. This transition is regulated by the maturation promoting factor (MPF), which is a heterodimer of cyclin B and the cyclin dependent kinase Cdc2. MPF is activated by the phosphatase Cdc2 5C and is inhibited by the kinase Myt1. The activation of MPF triggers the entry of the cell into mitosis. The amplification of the MPF signal is accomplished by the activation of the anaphase promoting complex (APC). The APC is a ubiquitin ligase that targets the cyclins for proteolytic degradation. The degradation of cyclin B leads to the inactivation of MPF and the completion of mitosis. The activity of the APC is regulated by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC). if the SAC is activated, then APC is inhibited. The checkpoint protein Mad2 binds to unattached kinetochores, inhibiting the APC. Additionally, the kinase Bub1 inhibits the APC when bound. Once all the chromosomes are attached to the spindle, the SAC is released, allowing the APC to activate.
The Wnt family of secreted glycoproteins plays a key role in the regulation of cellular differentiation during development. Wnt family members are involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and cell survival. Wnt family members can play a role in both processes. Wnt members can play a role in both canonical (beta-catenin dependent) and non-canonical (beta-catenin independent) Wnt signaling. The Wnt family member Wnt-1 is involved in the regulation of melanocyte differentiation. Wnt-1 binds to Frizzled-2 and activates the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Wnt-1 binds to Frizzled-2 and inhibits the kinase GSK-3 beta. In the absence of Wnt signaling, GSK-3 beta phosphorylates beta-catenin resulting in its degradation by the ubiquitin dependent proteosome pathway. Wnt binding to Frizzled leads to the inhibition of GSK-3 beta. GSK-3 beta activity is required for the phosphorylation of beta-catenin. unphosphorylated beta-catenin is transported into the nucleus where it associates with the transcription factors of the LEF-1 / TCF family. The beta-catenin / TCF complex activates the transcription of genes such as c-MYC, cyclin-D1 and endothelin-1. Endothelin-1 is a peptide hormone that regulates the differentiation of melanocytes and is involved in the development of the brain and the eyes. Wnt-1 signaling also activates the transcription of genes such as frizzled class receptor 3 and dopachrome tautomerase that are involved in the regulation of melanocyte differentiation. Dopachrome is a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of melanin. Wnt-1 signaling also activates the transcription of agouti signaling protein, a paracrine factor that regulates the ratio of eumelanin to pheomelanin in hair and skin. Wnt-5A is involved in the regulation of cell survival. Wnt-5A signals through the protein kinase C pathway to block apoptosis. Wnt-5A signals through the protein kinase C pathway to block apoptosis. Wnt-5A also activates the transcription of genes such as frzzled class receptor 3 and dopachrome tautomerase that are also involved in the regulation of melanocyte differentiation.
The insulin resistance of type II diabetes appears to be caused in part by the presence of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF alpha in adipose tissue. The presence of these cytokines causes a reduction in the expression of the insulin receptor in skeletal muscle and liver. This reduction in the number of insulin receptors causes a decrease in the response of these tissues to insulin and a corresponding increase in the concentration of glucose in the blood. The reduction in the number of insulin receptors in skeletal muscle appears to be caused by a reduction in the synthesis of the insulin receptor protein and not by a reduction in the rate of receptor degradation. The reduction in the expression of the insulin receptor in skeletal muscle appears to be caused by a reduction in the transcription of the insulin receptor gene. The reduction in the expression of the insulin receptor in adipose tissue appears to be caused by a combination of a reduction in the transcription of the insulin receptor gene and a reduction in the stability of the insulin receptor mRNA. The reduction in the expression of the insulin receptor in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue appears to be caused by a reduction in the transcription of the PPARG gene. The PPARG protein is a member of the steroid hormone receptor gene family and is activated by the antidiabetic drug rosiglitazone. The activation of PPARG by rosiglitazone causes an increase in the expression of the insulin receptor in skeletal muscle and a decrease in the expression of the insulin receptor in adipose tissue. The increase in the expression of the insulin receptor in skeletal muscle causes an increase in the response of these tissues to insulin and a corresponding decrease in the concentration of glucose in the blood. The decrease in the expression of the insulin receptor in adipose tissue causes a decrease in the concentration of leptin in the blood and an increase in the response of these tissues to leptin. The increase in the response of these tissues to leptin causes a decrease in the consumption of food and a decrease in the concentration of glucose in the blood.
Skeletal muscle is a major site of insulin-stimulated glucose disposal. The insulin resistance that accompanies obesity contributes to type 2 diabetes. Skeletal muscle insulin resistance is associated with defects in insulin signaling in skeletal muscle, including reduced IRS-1-associated PI3-kinase activity and reduced activation of the protein kinase AKT / PKB. The defects in AKT activation in skeletal muscle of insulin resistant individuals may be caused in part by increased expression of the cytokine TNF-alpha. TNF-alpha reduces the expression of the insulin signaling intermediate IRS-1 and also reduces the activity of the insulin signaling intermediate PI3-kinase. The reduced PI3-kinase activity in skeletal muscle of insulin resistant individuals contributes to the defect in AKT activation and the reduced insulin signaling in skeletal muscle of insulin resistant individuals.
Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease in which the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas are destroyed. The disease is associated with the presence of islet-specific T cells, and the severity of the disease is influenced by the genetic makeup of the individual. The strongest genetic association is with the MHC class II gene, HLA-DQB1 * 0 2 0 1, which is present in approximately 5 0% of all patients. Other MHC genes also contribute to the risk of developing the disease, including HLA-DRB1 * 0 4 0 1 and -DQA1 * 0 3 0 1. The presence of specific MHC class II molecules that bind a large repertoire of self-peptides may be important in the development of type 1 diabetes. T cells that respond to islet antigens in the context of specific MHC molecules may be involved in the destruction of beta cells. T cells that respond to insulin may be involved in the initial response, but over time the response to other islet antigens may lead to the destruction of beta cells. T cells that respond to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) may be involved in the initiation of the response, but other T cells that respond to GAD may be involved in the later stages of the disease. T cells that respond to other islet antigens may be involved in the activation of the B cells that produce insulin, or in the destruction of the B cells. T cells that respond to heat shock proteins may be involved in the initiation of the response, but other T cells that respond to heat shock proteins may be involved in the later stages of the disease. T cells that respond to microbial antigens may also be involved in the initial response, but in later stages of the disease, the response to microbial antigens may be suppressed by the response to self-antigens. T cells that respond to microbial antigens may be suppressed by the response to self-antigens, while T cells that respond to self-antigens may be deleted or rendered anergic.
The differentiation of insulin-producing beta-cells from pancreatic precursor cells is a key component of strategies to treat diabetes. Understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate beta-cell differentiation may provide the key to generating beta-cells from other cell types. Recent studies have identified several transcription factors that play key roles in beta-cell differentiation. These factors include the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors NeuroD / Beta2 and IDX-1, the paired-like homeodomain factors Pax4 and Pax6, and the Fox factor Foxa2. In addition to regulating beta-cell differentiation, these factors also play important roles in the differentiation of other cell types. NeuroD / Beta2 is required for the differentiation of neurons, and also for the differentiation of insulin-producing beta-cells from pancreatic precursor cells. Mice lacking NeuroD / Beta2 have no beta-cells and are diabetic. The expression of NeuroD / Beta2 in non-beta-cells is sufficient to induce their differentiation into insulin-producing cells. The expression of NeuroD / Beta2 in other cell types may provide a strategy for generating beta-cells for use in the treatment of diabetes. Another bHLH factor involved in beta-cell differentiation is IDX-1. Idx-1 expression is restricted to the pancreas and the pituitary gland in the early embryo, and is later restricted to beta-cells in the developing and adult pancreas. Mice lacking Idx-1 have a dramatic reduction in the number of beta-cells and develop diabetes. The expression of Idx-1 in non-beta-cells is sufficient to induce their differentiation into insulin-producing cells. The paired-like homeodomain factors Pax4 and Pax6 play important roles in the differentiation of the pituitary gland and the retina, and also in the differentiation of beta-cells from pancreatic precursor cells. Mice lacking both Pax6 and Pax4 have a complete absence of the pituitary gland and retina and lack insulin-producing beta-cells. The selector gene Foxa2 is required for the expression of several genes involved in glucose metabolism, including the insulin gene. Mice lacking Foxa2 have a dramatic reduction in the number of insulin-producing beta-cells and develop diabetes. Foxa2 is also required for the expression of NeuroD / Beta2 and Idx-1, and may induce beta-cell differentiation in part through the activation of NeuroD / Beta2 and Idx-1 expression. The identification of transcription factors that regulate beta-cell differentiation has provided important insights into the mechanisms that regulate beta-cell differentiation and may provide the key to generating beta-cells for the treatment of diabetes.
The epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) plays a key role in sodium absorption by the kidney and colon and is also involved in the regulation of blood pressure. ENaC is a heteromultimer formed from alpha, beta and gamma subunits. The presence of the gamma subunit is essential for channel function. Factors that increase intracellular sodium concentration, such as vasopressin, increase surface expression of ENaC by inhibiting channel endocytosis. This is mediated by binding of SGK1 (serum / glucocorticoid regulated kinase 1) to the N-terminal domain of the ENaC gamma subunit. SGK1 is a downstream target of the kinase Akt, activated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Binding of SGK1 to the ENaC gamma subunit causes the channel to be retained in the plasma membrane by preventing interaction with the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2. This results in increased sodium absorption and the subsequent reduction in blood pressure.
The intracellular movement of vesicles and organelles is driven by the microtubule-associated motor protein dynein in association with the dynactin complex. The dynein / dynactin complex interacts with the ras-related protein Rab3A and the microtubule-associated protein tau, which are involved in regulated vesicle release in neurons. The dynein / dynactin complex also interacts with the GTPase RhoA, which regulates actin cytoskeleton dynamics. The interaction of the dynein / dynactin complex with RhoA suggests that this complex may also be involved in the intracellular transport of vesicles or organelles along the actin cytoskeleton. The regulation of this process is not known, but may involve the phosphorylation of the dynein intermediate chain by PKA. Another protein that may regulate the interaction of the dynein / dynactin complex with other proteins is the 35 kDa dynein light chain. This subunit is encoded by two different genes, DLC1 and DLC2. The 35 kDa dynein light chain interacts with the intermediate chain of dynein and with the dynactin complex. The 35 kDa dynein light chain also interacts with the p140 component of the SNARE complex involved in vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release. The 35 kDa dynein light chain also interacts with the G-protein Gs, the activation of which stimulates vesicle release. The interaction of the dynein / dynactin complex with both the microtubule and actin cytoskeleton may be involved in the intracellular transport of vesicles or organelles along both cytoskeletal networks.
This group of genes does not group into a meaningful cluster.
Mitochondria are involved in a number of important cellular functions such as energy production, free radical production, calcium homeostasis and apoptosis. The mitochondrial genome encodes for 1 3 proteins involved in electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation. (ABSTRACT will be shown). 1. NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone), a complex involved in the transfer of electrons from NADH to ubiquinone. There are four protein subunits in this complex in mammals. These are: I) NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone), polypeptide 1. 2. III) NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone), polypeptide 2. IV) Ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase (complex III). There is a pool of ubiquinone (coenzyme Q) in the mitochondrial membrane that is involved in the transfer of electrons from cytochrome c to NADH. There are two forms of ubiquinone in mitochondria. The major form is ubiquinone-9 (9, 1 0-dihrororoubiquinone), which is found in all mitochondria. A smaller form, ubiquinone-8 (8, 9-dihroubiquinone), is found in higher eukaryotes. 3. ATP synthase (F1Fo-ATP synthase). This is a complex involved in the synthesis of ATP using the energy of a chemical gradient between mitochondria and cytoplasm. It is composed of two parts. The F1 portion is responsible for the binding and hydrolysis of ATP and the movement of the rotor. The Fo portion is involved in the transport of protons across the mitochondrial membrane. There are no crystal structures for any of the mitochondrial proteins. However, a number of structural models have been proposed for the F1 portion based on the structure of F1-ATPase from bacteria. These models have been supported by a combination of chemical modification and immunological studies. The structure of ATP synthase from bovine heart mitochondria has been determined by X-ray crystallography. This structure has been used as a basis for the modeling of the other mitochondrial ATP synthases. The structure of F1-ATPase from bacteria has also been used as a basis for the modeling of the mitochondrial proteins. The structure of ATP synthase is very similar in bacteria and mammals. There are, however, a number of differences that give rise to the different properties of the mitochondrial proteins. The F1 portion of ATP synthase is much more stable in vitro than the bacterial enzyme. The bacterial enzyme is inhibited by high concentrations of oligomycin, an inhibitor of mitochondrial ATP synthase. The oligomycin sensitivity determinant (OLIV) is a region of about 2 0 amino acids that is absent in bacterial ATP synthase. The presence of OLIV appears to be responsible for the increased oligomycin sensitivity of the mitochondrial enzyme. 4. The Fo portion of ATP synthase is much more complex than bacterial Fo. There are at least 6 different subunits in the mammalian Fo portion. The most extensively studied is subunit c. This is the component that binds the membrane-spanning portion of the mitochondrial inner membrane. There are at least 4 different subunits in the mitochondrial ATP synthase that are involved in binding of cytochrome c. There are also two additional proteins, d and F6, that are involved in the stabilization of the complex. 5. There are a number of factors that modulate the activity of ATP synthase. The most important is ADP / ATP ratio. The activity of ATP synthase is closely linked to the energy state of the cell. The concentration of ATP in the cytoplasm regulates the activity of ATP synthase in a manner that is known as the ATP synthase feedback inhibition. The presence of ATP in the mitochondrial matrix inhibits the activity of the enzyme. This is known as the ATP synthase phosphate-dependent regulation. If the concentration of ATP in the mitochondrial matrix falls below a critical value, then the activity of the enzyme will also fall. This is known as the ATP synthase phosphate-dependent activation. There are also a number of factors that modulate the activity of ATP synthase in a more indirect manner. These include the membrane potential and the concentration of cytochrome c in the mitochondrial intermembrane space. The membrane potential is a key factor in the activation of ATP synthase. The concentration of cytochrome c affects the activity of the enzyme indirectly through its effect on the membrane potential.
Glutamatergic-mediated nitric oxide (NO) production plays a key role in neuronal cell death in a number of neurodegenerative conditions. Overstimulation of the N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor leads to excessive calcium influx and the activation of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), resulting in the production of cytotoxic levels of nitric oxide (NO). This process is blocked by the N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor channel blocker, MK-8 0 1, and the NO synthase inhibitor, L-N6-iminoethyl-lysine (L-NIL). NO reacts with superoxide to form the highly reactive peroxynitrite (ONOO), which damages proteins, lipids and nucleic acids. Protein nitration by peroxynitrite is one of the major mechanisms responsible for protein damage in neurodegenerative diseases. The interaction of peroxynitrite with tyrosine residues of proteins leads to the formation of 3-nitrotyrosine, a stable and specific marker of peroxynitrite-mediated protein oxidation. 3-Nitrotyrosine is present in high concentrations in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and HIV-associated dementia. The reaction of peroxynitrite with double-stranded DNA leads to the formation of 3-nitrotyrosine-containing oligonucleotides, a marker of DNA damage by peroxynitrite. DNA damage may trigger the activation of the caspase cascade and subsequent cell death.
Mitochondria are essential organelles for aerobic respiration and energy metabolism. Defects in mitochondrial function have been implicated in a variety of human diseases. Mitochondria are found in all eukaryotic cells, but mitochondrial function differs in different cell types. In most cells, mitochondria are found in tight association with the cytoplasmic face of the inner mitochondrial membrane, the mitochondrial membrane. The mitochondrial genome in mammals is a 1 6. 5 kb, double-stranded, circular molecule that encodes for 1 3 proteins involved in electron transport and ATP synthesis. The mitochondrial genome is not transcribed in its own RNA polymerase. Rather, transcription of the mitochondrial genome is coordinated with the nuclear genome. Mitochondrial DNA is not replicated independently in the cell, but is replicated and segregated during mitosis. The mitochondrial genome is not randomly dispersed in the cell but is organized into discrete mitochondrial genomes, or nucleoids, that are associated with mitochondrial transcription and replication. The mitochondrial genome is associated with a variety of proteins in the mitochondrial nucleoid. The mitochondrial transcription and replication machinery is associated with a set of proteins that are homologous to nuclear replication factors (TFAM) and mitochondrial transcription factors (MTERF). TFAM is a member of the high mobility group (HMG) family of proteins that binds with high affinity and specificity to the mitochondrial genome. TFAM is essential for mitochondrial DNA maintenance and expression. The association of TFAM with the mitochondrial genome may be responsible for the tight association of the mitochondrial genome with the inner mitochondrial membrane. In addition to TFAM, there are at least two additional proteins that may be involved in the association of the mitochondrial genome with the inner mitochondrial membrane. The mitochondrial ribosomal proteins MRP and M7T are required for mitochondrial ribosomal biogenesis and are also required for mitochondrial DNA replication. These proteins are also required for mitochondrial DNA replication. The activities of these proteins are required for mitochondrial DNA replication but are not involved in mitochondrial transcription. The activities of these proteins are also required for mitochondrial DNA replication but are not involved in mitochondrial transcription. The activities of these proteins are also required for mitochondrial DNA replication but are not involved in mitochondrial transcription. The activities of these proteins are also required for mitochondrial DNA replication but are not involved in mitochondrial transcription. The activities of these proteins are also required for mitochondrial DNA replication but are not involved in mitochondrial transcription.
The complement system is part of the defense against invading cells and is composed of about twenty different proteins found in the plasma. The complement system can be activated by three different mechanisms, the classical pathway, the alternative pathway and the lectin-induced pathway. In the classical pathway, antibodies bound to foreign cells activate the complement system. In the alternative pathway, spontaneous activation of C3 convertase occurs in the absence of antibodies. In the lectin-induced pathway, carbohydrates on the surface of bacteria activate the complement system. Once activated, complement proteins form a pore in the bacterial cell membrane causing osmotic lysis. In addition to killing bacteria, complement also stimulates phagocytosis of foreign cells and an inflammatory response. There are a number of inhibitors of the complement system in place to prevent inappropriate activation. Factor H inhibits the formation of the C3 convertase and C4b2a, the C3 convertase in the alternative pathway, is inhibited by factor I in the presence of factor H. C1 inhibitor prevents the activation of complement by C1. C4bp and C1 inhibitor inhibit the formation of the C3 convertase in the classical and lectin-induced pathways, respectively. C5a and C3a are anaphylotoxins released during complement activation that stimulate inflammation. C5a also stimulates the migration of neutrophils, monocytes and basophils to the site of inflammation. Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) is a molecular chaperone that is induced by stress and is also found in the plasma. Hsp70 is a potent inhibitor of the complement system. The binding site for Hsp70 on the complement proteins has been identified. In addition to inhibiting the complement system, Hsp70 also has other functions. Hsp70 binds to the C3a receptor and blocks the anaphylotoxin response. In addition to inhibiting the complement system, Hsp70 also has anti-inflammatory properties independent of its role as a chaperone. Hsp70 binds to the formyl peptide receptor 2 (FPR2) and blocks the inflammatory response to formylated peptides such as fmlp. FPR2 is a GPCR in the GPCR gene family that is activated by the peptide chemoattractant N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fmlp). In addition to blocking the fmlp response, Hsp70 also has anti-inflammatory properties independent of its role as a chaperone. Mice lacking Hsp70 are more susceptible to septic shock induced by bacterial infection. The increased susceptibility of Hsp70 knockout mice to septic shock is due to the lack of inhibition of the complement system by Hsp70. In addition to inhibiting the complement system, Hsp70 also has anti-oxidant properties. Reactive oxygen species such as superoxide are produced during inflammation and are toxic to cells. Hsp70 directly inhibits the production of reactive oxygen species by the NADPH oxidase in neutrophils. Other members of the heat shock protein family also have anti-oxidant properties. Hsp90 and Hsp1 1 0 directly inhibit the formation of the superoxide anion by the NADPH oxidase in neutrophils. In addition to inhibiting the complement system and the oxidative burst in neutrophils, Hsp70 also blocks apoptosis in T cells. Unstimulated T cells are induced to apoptosis by the Fas ligand on activated macrophages. Fas ligand binding to Fas on T cells activates a caspase cascade that results in the degradation of cellular proteins and the fragmentation of DNA. Hsp70 blocks apoptosis in T cells by binding to the Fas-associated death domain (FADD) protein. FADD is a key protein in the apoptotic pathway induced by Fas. In addition to blocking apoptosis, Hsp70 also has other important functions. Hsp70 is a molecular chaperone that stabilizes proteins against stress-induced unfolding and degradation. In addition to acting as a molecular chaperone, Hsp70 also binds to a number of different proteins. Hsp70 directly binds to the amyloid-beta peptide associated with Alzheimers disease. Binding of Hsp70 to the amyloid-beta peptide blocks the aggregation of the amyloid-beta peptide and prevents the formation of amyloid plaques.
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a cAMP-regulated chloride channel expressed in epithelial cells. Mutations in the CFTR gene are associated with cystic fibrosis. In addition to acting as a cAMP-regulated chloride channel, CFTR is involved in other processes such as regulation of epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), protein kinase C, and vesicle trafficking. The diverse functions of CFTR may be mediated by its interaction with a variety of proteins. In this review, we will discuss recent data on the interaction of CFTR with proteins involved in vesicle trafficking. In particular, we will focus on the interaction of CFTR with the soluble N-ethyl maleimide sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs), a family of proteins essential for intracellular vesicle trafficking.
The acidic pH of endocytic vesicles is maintained by the action of vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase). This enzyme is composed of a peripheral V1 complex and a membrane-bound V0 complex. The V1 complex is composed of eight different subunits (A-H) and is responsible for ATP hydrolysis. The function of the V0 complex is less clear, but it may be involved in the translocation of protons. The assembly of the V0 and V1 complexes is regulated in a tissue-specific manner and is dependent on the presence of specific assembly factors. In addition to regulating assembly, the expression of V-ATPase subunits is regulated in a tissue-specific manner. The endosomal pH in macrophages is lower than in other cell types and this is due to the low expression of V-ATPase subunits in these cells. The reduced expression of V-ATPase subunits in macrophages is due, in part, to the action of interferon-gamma. Other factors that regulate V-ATPase expression include copper and the transcription factor Sp1. The reduced expression of V-ATPase subunits in macrophages may be important in regulating other macrophage functions such as antigen processing and presentation. In addition to regulating the endosomal pH, V-ATPase may also play a role in the activation of signal transduction cascades. V-ATPase is required for the activation of the EGF receptor and the chemokine receptor CXCR4. V-ATPase may play a more general role in the activation of signaling by other GPCRs. The role of V-ATPase in signaling is not yet clear, but may involve the generation of acidic microdomains in the plasma membrane that are required for the activation of transmembrane signaling proteins.
Neutrophils are key players in the immune system, providing protection against bacterial infection through the release of reactive oxygen species and the phagocytosis of invading bacteria. The neutrophil response to bacterial infection is rapid and localized, with the activation of neutrophils at the site of infection initiating an inflammatory response that recruits more neutrophils to the site to fight infection. The response to bacterial infection is localized to the site of infection, with the activation of neutrophils at the site of infection not causing a general activation of the immune system. The response to bacterial infection is localized to the site of infection, with the activation of neutrophils at the site of infection not causing a general activation of the immune system. To propagate the localized response to bacterial infection, neutrophils must communicate with other cells in the immune system and the rest of the body. Neutrophils express a variety of cell surface receptors that communicate with other cells, including the Fc portion of IgG, the complement receptor 3 (CD1 1b / CD1 8, CR3), and the Toll-like receptors TLR2 and TLR4. Stimulation of neutrophils through these receptors activates intracellular signaling pathways that result in the release of reactive oxygen species and the upregulation of adhesion molecules required for neutrophil immune function. This review will focus on the signaling pathways activated by the Fc portion of IgG, the complement receptor 3 and the Toll-like receptor 2 and 4. These three receptors are the primary receptors neutrophils use to respond to bacterial infection. In addition to neutrophils expressing these receptors, bacteria also release factors that activate neutrophils, including the formylated peptide fMLP, lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and peptidoglycans. fMLP is a small peptide released by bacteria that activates neutrophils through the GPCR FPR-1. LPS is a component of the outer membrane of bacteria and is a ligand for the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Peptidoglycans are fragments of bacterial cell walls that are recognized by the peptidoglycan receptor TLR2. In addition to activating neutrophils directly, factors released by bacteria can modulate the response of neutrophils to other factors. IL-8 is a chemokine released by neutrophils that attracts other neutrophils to the site of infection and activates them. IL-8 is released in response to a variety of factors, including fMLP, LPS and TNF. IL-8 activates neutrophils through the GPCR CXCR1 and is believed to play a key role in the amplification of the neutrophil response to infection. The IL-8 receptor is associated with several signaling pathways, including the activation of NF-kB, the activation of MAP kinases and the PI3 kinase pathway. The PI3 kinase pathway is required for IL-8 induced neutrophil activation. Other factors that modulate the response of neutrophils to bacterial infection include GM-CSF and TGF-beta. GM-CSF is a cytokine released by many cells that stimulates the proliferation and differentiation of neutrophils. TGF-beta is released by many cells, including neutrophils, and is a key regulator of immune system function. TGF-beta is a key regulator of the immune system, playing a key role in the differentiation of B cells to plasma cells and the suppression of T cell activation. In addition to inhibiting the activation of T cells and neutrophils, TGF-beta suppresses the activation of macrophages. The mechanism of TGF-beta suppression of neutrophil activation is not yet clear, but does not appear to involve changes in the expression of neutrophil surface receptors IL-8 receptor or TLR2. The suppression of neutrophil activation by TGF-beta may play a role in the localized response to bacterial infection.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) / AKT pathway is activated by a variety of stimuli, including growth factors, cytokines and integrins. Activation of this pathway promotes cell survival, blocking apoptosis. This is accomplished in part through phosphorylation of the protein kinase AKT / protein kinase B. AKT phosphorylation of the forkhead transcription factor FKHRL1 blocks its translocation to the nucleus and the expression of genes involved in apoptosis. Another substrate of AKT is the protease caspase 9. Phosphorylation of caspase 9 blocks its activation. Another substrate of AKT is the tumor suppressor p53. Phosphorylation of p53 by AKT blocks its transcriptional activation of genes involved in apoptosis. In addition to blocking apoptosis, the PI3K / AKT pathway promotes cell cycle progression. Phosphorylation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p53 by AKT blocks its interaction with the ubiquitin ligase complex and its proteosomal degradation. Another substrate of AKT is the kinase GSK-3. AKT phosphorylation of GSK-3 blocks its activity. The result of AKT phosphorylation is to block apoptosis and to promote cell cycle progression.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a key role in physiological blood vessel formation and pathological angiogenesis such as tumor growth and ischemic diseases. Hypoxia is a potent inducer of VEGF in vitro. The increase in secreted biologically active VEGF protein from cells exposed to hypoxia is partly due to an increased transcription rate, mediated by binding of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF1) to a hypoxia responsive element in the 5 '-flanking region of the VEGF gene. bHLH-PAS transcription factor that interacts with the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt), and its predicted amino acid sequence exhibits significant similarity to the hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1a) product. HLF mRNA expression is closely correlated with that of VEGF mRNA.. The high expression level of HLF mRNA in the O2 delivery system of developing embryos and adult organs suggests that in a normoxic state, HLF regulates gene expression of VEGF, various glycolytic enzymes, and others driven by the HRE sequence, and may be involved in development of blood vessels and the tubular system of lung. VEGF expression is dramatically induced by hypoxia due in large part to an increase in the stability of its mRNA. HuR binds with high affinity and specificity to the VRS element that regulates VEGF mRNA stability by hypoxia. In addition, an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) ensures efficient translation of VEGF mRNA even under hypoxia. The VHL tumor suppressor (von Hippel-Lindau) regulates also VEGF expression at a post-transcriptional level. The secreted VEGF is a major angiogenic factor that regulates multiple endothelial cell functions, including mitogenesis. Cellular and circulating levels of VEGF are elevated in hematologic malignancies and are adversely associated with prognosis. Angiogenesis is a very complex, tightly regulated, multistep process, the targeting of which may well prove useful in the creation of novel therapeutic agents. Current approaches being investigated include the inhibition of angiogenesis stimulants (e.g., VEGF), or their receptors, blockade of endothelial cell activation, inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases, and inhibition of tumor vasculature. Preclinical and early clinical studies of both monoclonal antibodies to VEGF and blockers of the VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase pathway indicate that these agents are safe and offer potential clinical utility in patients with hematologic malignancies.
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels, is a complex, tightly regulated process involving interactions between endothelial cells and surrounding tissues. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key angiogenic factor, inducing endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation. The angiogenic activity of VEGF is mediated through two tyrosine kinase receptors, VEGFR-1 (Flt-1) and VEGFR-2 (KDR / Flk-1), and their coreceptor neuropilin-1. VEGF is a heparin-binding glycoprotein, and binding is enhanced by cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Binding of VEGF to its receptors stimulates the tyrosine kinase activity of the receptors and induces the phosphorylation of several intracellular proteins. The VEGF signaling cascade includes activation of ras, p38, and map kinases and activation of the transcription factors NF-kB and E2F-1. VEGF induces the expression of genes involved in angiogenesis, such as basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and interleukin-8 (IL-8). Tumor cells and stromal cells in many cancers produce factors that stimulate angiogenesis, including VEGF, bFGF, and PDGF. Hypoxia is a potent inducer of VEGF expression in vitro and in vivo. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that binds to a hypoxia-responsive element (HRE) in the 5 '-flanking region of the VEGF gene. bHLH-PAS proteins such as HIF-1 are involved in the response of cells to hypoxia. HIF-1 is labile, and its level is regulated by oxygen tension. Under normoxic conditions, HIF-1 is ubiquitinated and subsequently degraded by proteasomes. Under hypoxic conditions, or in the presence of iron chelators or cobalt, HIF-1 is stabilized, translocates to the nucleus, and activates the transcription of various genes, including those for VEGF, bFGF, and PDGF. The discovery of the molecular mechanisms that regulate angiogenesis has led to the development of novel therapeutic agents that inhibit angiogenesis and may prove useful in the treatment of cancer and other diseases.
The epidermal growth factor (EGF) peptide induces cellular proliferation through the EGF receptor, which has a tyrosine kinase cytoplasmic domain, a single transmembrane domain and an extracellular domain involved in EGF binding and receptor dimerization. Inhibitors of the EGF receptor are being pursued as potential cancer therapies and EGF may stimulate wound healing. Mutation of the EGF receptor has been associated with cancer in humans. The proliferative effects of EGF are signaled through several pathways. Binding of EGF results in EGF receptor dimerization, autophosphorylation of the receptor, and tyrosine phosphorylation of other proteins. The EGF receptor activates ras and the MAP kinase pathway, ultimately causing phosphorylation of transcription factors such as c-Fos to create AP-1 and ELK-1 that contribute to proliferation. Activation of STAT-1 and STAT-3 transcription factors by JAK kinases in response to EGF contributes to proliferative signaling. Phosphatidylinositol signaling and calcium release induced by EGF activate protein kinase C, another component of EGF signaling. Crosstalk of EGF signaling with other pathways make the EGF receptor a junction point between signaling systems.
The p53 tumor suppressor gene encodes a transcription factor that is activated by DNA damage and that induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The function of p53 is inhibited by the human papillomavirus E6 protein. The transforming activity of E6 is in part due to its ability to interact with p53. In addition to interacting with p53, E6 interacts with the tumor suppressor protein p53-BP (also called p21) and with the ubiquitin ligase complex that targets p5 3 for degradation. The interaction of E6 with p53-BP appears to be required for the degradation of p53 by the ubiquitin ligase complex. The inactivation of p53 by E6 may also involve an interference with the transcriptional activation function of p53. The activity of p53 is also regulated by phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of p53 by the checkpoint kinase chk1 induces the arrest of the cell cycle at the G2 / M boundary. The activation of p53-dependent genes is inhibited by the interaction with the Jab1 protein. The interaction of p53 with the Epstein Barr Virus EBNA-1 protein blocks the degradation of p53 by the proteasome and promotes the survival of infected B cells.
The majority of cancers exhibit alterations in the PI3K / AKT pathway. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit amplification or over-expression of the PI3K catalytic subunit, PIK3CA. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit loss of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit amplification or over-expression of the AKT oncogene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit loss of the p15INK4b tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p27Kip1 tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the Rb tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the TGF-beta receptor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the FH tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the Rb tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p21Cip1 tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p23Cip1 tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the BRCA tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p25Cip1 tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p53 tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the BRCA tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p21Cip1 tumor suppressor gene. Approximately a third of all cancers exhibit mutation or deletion of the p53 tumor suppressor gene.
The RET gene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase that is activated by binding of its ligand, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), in a complex with a glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI) -linked coreceptor. The RET protein has a cadherin-like extracellular domain, a single transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic domain with a tyrosine kinase domain. The GDNF receptor includes a GDNF family receptor alpha (GFRalpha) coreceptor that is required for RET activation. There are four members of the GFRalpha family, GFRalpha1-4. The GFRalpha1 coreceptor is required for GDNF to activate RET, while the other three GFRalpha coreceptors are required to form a complex with RET for binding of neurturin, artemin or persephin. Binding of GDNF or a GDNF-GFRalpha1 complex to the RET receptor induces dimerization of the receptor and activation of the RET tyrosine kinase. The signaling pathway downstream of RET is not yet clear, but appears to include activation of the MAPK and PI3 kinase pathways. RET is expressed in neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems and in a subset of epithelial cells in the developing kidney. Mice lacking RET or GDNF exhibit defects in the development of the enteric nervous system and kidneys, indicating that RET signaling is required for the normal development of these tissues. Mutations in RET that cause cancer in humans have been identified in multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B and in familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. Some of these mutations are in the extracellular domain, thought to alter the ability of RET to dimerize, and are associated with a MEN2A phenotype, while others are in the tyrosine kinase domain, are associated with MEN2B and are thought to alter the substrate specificity of the RET kinase. Somatic mutations in RET that result in constitutive activation of the kinase have been identified in a subset of cases of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
The morphogenic signaling molecule Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) plays essential roles in the developing CNS, including the proliferation of neuronal precursor cells. Proliferative signaling by Shh is involved in the development of cancer, including specific brain and skin cancers such as basal cell carcinomas. Shh signaling is initiated by binding to a receptor complex on the cell surface, including the transmembrane protein Ptc-1 and the GPCR-like protein Smo. Shh binding causes the accumulation of Ptc-1 and Smo, and activation of Shh signaling. Activated Smo stimulates the Shh signaling pathway by two mechanisms. One mechanism involves inhibition of Supressor of Fused (SUFU), a negative regulator of the Gli family of transcription factors that mediate Shh signaling, causing the activation of Gli proteins. Shh binding also activates the protein kinase GSK-3 beta, which regulates the stability of the transcription factor b-catenin in the Wnt signaling pathway. Activation of GSK-3 beta by Shh causes the phosphorylation and degradation of b-catenin, reducing its concentration in the cell. Wnt family members bind to Frizzled receptors along with the coreceptor low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). Wnt binding causes the inhibition of GSK-3 beta, increasing b-catenin concentration in the cell. Wnt binding also activates a pathway involving the kinases Dsh and GSK-3 beta that regulates the cytoskeleton and is involved in the development of the embryonic dorsal axis. The pathway involving Dsh and GSK-3 beta does not appear to involve b-catenin. The activation of Shh signaling by Ptc-1 and Smo resembles the activation of G-protein coupled receptors by their ligands, and may provide a useful model system for the study of GPCR signaling.
The fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are a family of polypeptides that elicit a broad range of biological responses, including the stimulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation. The FGF family currently contains eight distinct members, designated FGF1-8. FGF receptors 1-4 are members of the tyrosine kinase receptor gene family. Alternative splicing of the FGF receptor genes results in the expression of several different receptor isoforms that exhibit distinct ligand specificities and tissue distributions. FGF receptors 1-4 are high affinity receptors for the FGF family members, and bind FGF with high affinity (Kd = 10 (-1 1) -1 0 (-1 2) M). heparan sulfate proteoglycans are required for FGF receptor dimerization and activation. Upon binding of FGF, the FGF receptor undergoes autophosphorylation and the activation of downstream signaling pathways. FGF receptors 1-3 can form functional heterodimers, although the physiological importance of this process is presently unclear. FGF receptors 1 and 3 are widely expressed and mediate the mitogenic responses to most of the FGF family members. FGF receptor 2 is expressed at high levels in the heart and is essential for normal cardiac development. FGF receptor 4 is expressed in a limited number of tissues and plays a role in the development of the skin and skeletal muscle. The recent identification of several agents that specifically inhibit the FGF receptor tyrosine kinase have provided important tools for the study of FGF receptor signaling.
Angiogenesis, the formation of new blood vessels, is a complex, tightly regulated process. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key angiogenic factor. Hypoxia is a potent inducer of VEGF in vitro, and is thought to be a major regulator of angiogenesis in vivo. Hypoxia induces the expression of VEGF through activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). HIF-1 is a heterodimer consisting of HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta subunits. The HIF-1beta subunit is stable, whereas the HIF-1alpha subunit is regulated at the protein level by oxygen tension. Under normoxic conditions, HIF-1alpha is rapidly degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The F-box and leucine-rich repeat protein-1 (FBP1) interacts with the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene product, which targets HIF-1alpha for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. FBP1 is the substrate recognition component of a ubiquitin ligase that targets HIF-1alpha for degradation. The VHL tumor suppressor gene is mutated in patients with von Hippel-Lindau disease, a condition associated with the development of highly vascular tumors. In addition to VHL, HIF-1alpha is regulated by other factors including growth factors, oncogenes, and tumor suppressor genes. Activation of Ras or Raf can induce HIF-1 and VEGF expression. The induction of HIF-1 and VEGF by Ras is mediated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Activation of the MAPK pathway by growth factors such as EGF leads to phosphorylation and activation of the kinases Mek1 and Erk, which phosphorylate and activate FBP1, leading to HIF-1 activation and VEGF expression. VEGF expression induced by hypoxia is also mediated by activation of HIF-1. In addition to inducing VEGF expression, hypoxia also alters the properties of endothelial cells, increasing their migration and proliferation. These effects are mediated by activation of the transcription factor E2F-1 by hypoxia. E2F-1 induces the expression of cyclin A, which complexes with cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (cdk2). The cyclin A / cdk2 complex phosphorylates the Rb protein, releasing the transcription factor E2F-1. HIF-1 and c-Myc cooperate to induce the expression of genes involved in angiogenesis, including VEGF.
The role of p53 in the cell cycle and apoptosis has been extensively reviewed previously. This diagram is not a complete compilation of all the information available on p53, but is a general introduction to the role of p53 in these processes. The cycle begins with the binding of growth factors to tyrosine kinase receptors or G-protein coupled receptors. This is followed by the activation of Ras and the subsequent phosphorylation and activation of Raf. Raf in turn activates the MAP kinase kinase cascade, which includes Mek and Erk. Mek activates Erk, which translocates to the nucleus and activates transcription by phosphorylation of various transcription factors such as ELK-1, SRF and MYC. The activity of p53 is regulated by its association with various proteins. The most well-known of these is the tumor suppressor p53-induced phosphatase (p53IP). p53IP is induced by p53 and causes the dephosphorylation and inactivation of p53. This results in the termination of the signal that p53 was involved in a previous cycle. Another important regulator of p53 is the mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) protein. MDM2 binds to p53 and causes its rapid degradation by the ubiquitin-dependent proteosome pathway. This interaction is mediated by the p53-binding protein, Mdm-2-estabilizing protein (EAP). In addition to causing the degradation of p53, MDM2 also acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and directly catalyzes the attachment of ubiquitin to p53. Once in the nucleus, p53 acts as a transcription factor. It forms heterodimers with various members of the Ets family of transcription factors such as ELK-1, erg-1 and erg-2. These heterodimers bind to a specific DNA sequence known as the p53 response element (PRE). In addition to acting as a transcription factor, p53 also interacts with various proteins involved in cell cycle regulation such as the tumor suppressor p53-induced tre-2 oncogene (p53ITO) and the CDK inhibitor p15 (p15INK4b). These interactions result in the inhibition of cell cycle progression at various stages. p53 interacts with p53ITO causing it to translocate to the nucleus. In the nucleus, p53 and p53ITO interact with the transcription factor E2F-1, inhibiting its transcriptional activity. Similarly, p53 interacts with p15INK4b, causing it to translocate to the nucleus and interact with STAT-5A. The formation of these complexes results in the inhibition of cell cycle progression at the G1 to S transition.
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) / AKT pathway is a key regulator of cellular survival and growth and is activated in many cancers. The activation of this pathway occurs through a variety of mechanisms including amplification or mutation of AKT, loss of the tumor suppressor PTEN, and amplification or mutation of the receptor tyrosine kinases HER2 and EGFR. In addition to regulating cellular survival and growth, the PI3K / AKT pathway also plays a role in tumor angiogenesis. The transcription factor NF-kB is activated by AKT and contributes to the expression of angiogenic factors such as VEGF. The transcription factor HIF-1 is also activated by AKT and contributes to the expression of angiogenic factors such as VEGF. The role of the PI3K / AKT pathway in angiogenesis and cancer has made this pathway a promising target for the development of cancer therapeutics.
The role of integrins in the organization and function of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is well established. In addition to providing a structural role, integrins communicate with the cellular interior through focal adhesion complexes that contain proteins involved in signal transduction. Integrins do not themselves possess a kinase domain but rely on association with cytoplasmic kinases to transmit signals. Interactions between the ECM and focal adhesion complexes regulate the activity of several signaling pathways including the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) and protein kinase B (PKB / AKT) pathways. The cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) and their associated cyclin regulatory subunits are key regulators of the cell cycle. The activity of the CDKs is regulated by the phosphorylation state of two tyrosine and threonine residues and by association with CDK inhibitors (CDKIs). Phosphorylation of the CDKs at specific positions leads to CDK activation, while dephosphorylation results in inactivation. The CDKIs, including p53, Cip1 / Waf1, and Kip1, bind to and inhibit the activity of the CDKs. The activity of the CDKs is also regulated by association with other proteins. For example, association of CDK4 or CDK6 with cyclin D results in partial activation, while association with cyclin E or A results in full activation. CDK2, in complex with cyclin A or E, phosphorylates the CDKIs, resulting in their degradation and resumption of CDK activity. The focal adhesion complex contains several proteins that regulate the activity of the integrins and the cell cycle. Paxillin, a focal adhesion complex protein, binds to the cytoplasmic domain of integrin beta subunits. In addition to binding to the integrins, paxillin also interacts with FAK and src. The activity of FAK and src are increased when integrins are activated, providing a potential mechanism for regulation of cell cycle progression by integrins. The retinoblastoma gene product (Rb), in association with the E2F transcription factors and CDKIs, regulates the G1 to S transition. Phosphorylation of Rb by the CDKs results in the release of the E2F transcription factors and progression through the cell cycle.
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) / AKT pathway is activated in response to many different stimuli and plays a key role in cell survival. Activation of this pathway can occur through activation of growth factor receptors or through inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. In the first case, activation occurs through tyrosine phosphorylation of the adaptor protein Shc, which binds to Grb-2 and the Ras GEF Sos-1. Ras activates Raf, MEK and ERK, ultimately leading to phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB and cell survival. Tumor suppressor genes such as p53 and PTEN inhibit this pathway. PTEN is a phosphatidylinositol 3, 4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) phosphatase and a tumor suppressor. When activated, PTEN dephosphorylates PIP3, inhibiting the AKT pathway and leading to cell death. AKT inhibits apoptosis by phosphorylating the proteins Bad, caspase-9 and forkhead transcription factors. In addition, AKT phosphorylates the NF-kB inhibitor IkB, releasing NF-kB to translocate into the nucleus and activate transcription of genes involved in survival. In addition to inhibiting apoptosis, AKT activation stimulates cell growth through phosphorylation of the mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) kinase and the translational regulator p70 S6 kinase.
Exposure of T cells to antigen in the context of MHC II activates T cell responses. T cell activation is initiated by recognition of antigen by the T cell receptor (TCR) in the context of MHC II. T cell activation is also enhanced by interactions between costimulatory receptors on the T cell and ligands on the antigen-presenting cell (APC). The CD40-CD40L interaction is a well-studied example of a costimulatory interaction. CD40 is a receptor expressed on B cells and other APCs that is induced by activation of B cells and other cell types. CD40L is a receptor expressed on T cells that is induced by activation of the T cell receptor complex. Binding of CD40L to CD40 provides a costimulatory signal that activates T cells and is required for T cell activation. The CD40-CD40L interaction plays an important role in the activation of B cells and T cells and in the development and activation of the immune system. Abnormally regulated CD40-CD40L interaction can lead to autoimmune disease.
The role of helper T cells in the immune system is to provide help to B cells and cytotoxic T cells to respond to specific antigens in the form of proteins bound to MHC molecules on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. The helper T cells that are involved in the immune response are classified as Th1 and Th2 cells, based on the cytokines they produce and the cytokines they respond to. Th1 cells produce pro-inflammatory cytokines like IFN-g, TNF-b and IL-2, while Th2 cells produce the cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-6 and IL-13. The cytokines produced by Th1 cells stimulate the immune response while Th2 cytokines generally down-regulate the immune response. The cytokines produced by Th1 and Th2 cells regulate each other's production and the response of other immune cells to specific antigens. The immune response to specific antigens is initiated by the recognition of antigen by the B cell receptor and the T cell receptor, both of which are part of the B and T cell receptor complex, respectively. The B cell receptor produces a specific antibody response, while the T cell response is more complex and includes the production of cytokines that stimulate the immune response to specific antigens. When the T cell receptor interacts with antigen, it stimulates the proliferation and differentiation of the T cell, and also induces the expression of cytokines that regulate the immune response to specific antigens. The T cell receptor contains two subunits, the alpha and beta chains, that are responsible for the recognition of specific antigens, and the CD3 complex that is involved in transducing the activation signal to the T cell after the antigen-receptor interaction. The activation of the T cell also induces the expression of CD4 that is required for efficient helper T cell function. The interaction of helper T cells with antigen-presenting cells involves several steps. The first step is the recognition of antigen by the T cell receptor, which is usually specific for a single antigen. This is followed by the interaction of costimulatory molecules between the T cell and the antigen-presenting cell that increase the specificity and affinity of the interaction and also provide the signal that induces T cell activation. The interaction of the T cell receptor with antigen-presenting cell results in the activation of the T cell and the expression of cytokines that regulate the immune response to that antigen. If the interaction between the T cell receptor and antigen-presenting cell is too strong or the antigen-presenting cell does not present the antigen, then the T cell undergoes apoptosis (programmed cell death). The interaction between the T cell and antigen-presenting cell also induces the expression of molecules on the surface of the T cell that assist in the interaction and modulate the response of the T cell to specific antigens. One of the key molecules involved in the interaction of T cells with antigen-presenting cells is the interaction of CD40 with CD28. CD40 interacts with CD28 expressed on the surface of B cells and other antigen-presenting cells. If the interaction between CD40 and CD28 is strong, then the T cell will proliferate and produce cytokines, but if the interaction between CD40 and CD28 is weak, then the T cell will not proliferate but will induce tolerance to the specific antigen. If the interaction between CD40 and CD28 is too strong, then the T cell will be induced to apoptosis. If the interaction between CD40 and CD28 is weak, then IL-10 produced by the T cell will block the interaction between CD40 and CD28 and prevent T cell activation. IL-4 also blocks the interaction between CD40 and CD28 to prevent T cell activation. If the interaction between CD40 and CD28 is too weak, then the T cell will be induced to apoptosis. If the interaction between CD40 and CD28 is strong, then the T cell will be induced to apoptosis.
CD4 + helper T cells are required for the activation and differentiation of B cells and CD8 + cytotoxic T cells are required for the activation of cytotoxic T cells. The activation of T cells requires recognition of antigen by the T cell receptor (TCR) in the context of MHC on the surface of an antigen-presenting cell. The T cell receptor is a multisubunit complex with associated signaling molecules that includes the CD3 proteins that are invariant throughout T cell development. Interaction of the TCR with antigen-MHC complex stimulates T cell activation, a process that is enhanced by costimulatory signals provided by interaction of CD2 8 with its ligands, CD8 0 and CD8 6. CD45 (protein tyrosine phosphatase) dephosphorylates factors involved in TCR signaling that attenuate T cell activation. The requirement for costimulatory signals provides a mechanism to control T cell activation and prevent inappropriate and hazardous T cell activation. Cytotoxic T cells and helper T cells are required for the immune response to microbial pathogens, but inappropriate or excessive activation of T cells can lead to autoimmune disease and perhaps to transplant rejection. Cytotoxic T cells induce apoptosis of infected cells and helper T cells provide costimulatory signals that are required for activation of cytotoxic T cells. CD45 activity is reduced in cytotoxic T cells relative to helper T cells to allow for their activation by reduced CD45 activity may be involved in the differential regulation of T cell activation.
NK (natural killer) cells are lymphocytes distinct from B and T cells that induce perforin-mediated lysis of tumor cells and virus-infected cells. NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity is activated by glycoproteins on the cell surface (activating receptors) and inhibited by MHC-1 with self-peptide bound. The MHC-1 inhibitory signal through Ig-family or lectin receptors prevents NK cells from killing normal cells. Abnormal MHC-1 expression in infected or tumor cells results in the release of perforin, a cytotoxic protein, and the lysis of the abnormal cell. NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity is also involved in the innate immune response to infection. NK cells do not rearrange antigen-specific receptors, but express receptors that recognize specific molecules on other cells. NK cell receptors can be grouped into two major categories based on their structure and function: Ig-family receptors and lectin-family receptors. Ig-family receptors include CD1 6 (FcRIII), CD80 and CD86 (CD28). CD80 and CD86 bind to the T cell coreceptor CD28 and are involved in the activation of T cells by NK cells and cytotoxic T cells. The lectin-family receptors include Ly-4 9 and KIR (killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors) in humans and Ly4 9 and NKG2 in mice. Ly-4 9 and KIR proteins have two Ig-like domains in their extracellular region and a long cytoplasmic tail with ITIM (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif) or ITIM-like motifs that mediate inhibition of NK cell activation. NKG2 proteins have a similar structure to KIR proteins, but have a cytoplasmic tail with only a short cytoplasmic domain without an obvious signaling motif. The combination of Ig-family and lectin-family receptors on NK cells determines their specificity for target cells. NK cells that express only Ig-family receptors are specific for MHC-1 with self-peptide, while cells that express both Ig-family and lectin-family receptors are not inhibited by MHC-1 and are activated by all cells. Upon activation, NK cells release perforin to lyse cells through osmotic lysis and release cytokines to stimulate other immune cells.
The process of antigen-specific T cell activation is initiated by the recognition of peptide bound to MHC on the surface of an antigen-presenting cell by the T cell receptor (TCR). T cell activation is a multi-step process and is influenced by a variety of factors, including the density and spatial organization of MHC-peptide complexes on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell. T cells are not activated by the TCR alone, but require additional signals provided by costimulatory receptors and by adhesion molecules. CD28 provides a costimulatory signal in the context of TCR engagement by MHC-peptide, and is a member of the Ig gene family. CD28 provides a costimulatory signal in the absence of TCR engagement, providing a co-stimulatory signal for T cell activation that is important for the generation of T cell responses during immune surveillance and for the induction of T cell tolerance. CD28 does not possess intrinsic catalytic activity but associates with the protein tyrosine kinases Lck and Fyn to provide costimulatory signals for T cell activation. The cytoplasmic domain of CD28 contains two tyrosine residues that are phosphorylated upon TCR engagement, providing binding sites for signaling proteins with SH2 domains, including the protein tyrosine kinase ZAP-7 0. The adhesion molecule LFA-1 (lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1) provides another costimulatory signal for T cell activation that is required for efficient T cell activation. LFA-1 is a member of the Ig gene family and binds to its ligand ICAM-1 in a co-stimulatory manner with TCR. LFA-1 and CD28 promote T cell activation by increasing the local concentration of MHC-peptide complexes at the site of T cell-antigen-presenting cell interaction, localizing the TCR and MHC-peptide complexes to the same site on the cell surface, and inducing integrin-mediated T cell adhesion. The CD40 receptor and its ligand CD4 0L are involved in a similar co-stimulatory signaling pathway as CD28. CD40 binds to its ligand CD4 0L, a member of the TNF gene family, and is expressed on activated T cells. Binding of CD40L to CD40 activates T cells to express cytokines and other factors, including IL-2. The activation of T cells by CD40 requires the expression of MHC-peptide by the antigen-presenting cell, and is blocked by antibodies to CD40 or by a peptide corresponding to the CDR3 region of the TCR. The co-stimulatory signaling pathways involving CD28, LFA-1 and CD40 provide excellent targets for the modulation of T cell activation during immune responses and for the modulation of autoimmune disease.