N-glycans or asparagine-linked glycans are major constituents of glycoproteins in eukaryotes. N-glycans are covalently attached to asparagine with the consensus sequence of Asn-X-Ser / Thr by an N-glycosidic bond, GlcNAc b1- Asn. Biosynthesis of N-glycans begins on the cytoplasmic face of the ER membrane with the transferase reaction of UDP-GlcNAc and the lipid-like precursor P-Dol (dolichol phosphate) to generate GlcNAc a1- PP-Dol. After sequential addition of monosaccharides by ALG glycosyltransferases, the N-glycan precursor is attached by the OST (oligosaccharyltransferase) complex to the polypeptide chain that is being synthesized and translocated through the ER membrane. The protein-bound N-glycan precursor is subsequently trimmed, extended, and modified in the ER and Golgi by a complex series of reactions catalyzed by membrane-bound glycosidases and glycosyltransferases. N-glycans thus synthesized are classified into three types: high-mannose type, complex type, and hybrid type. Defects in N-glycan biosynthesis lead to a variety of human diseases known as congenital disorders of glycosylation.
O-glycans are a class of glycans that modify serine or threonine residues of proteins. Biosynthesis of O-glycans starts from the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to serine or threonine. The first GalNAc may be extended with sugars including galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, fucose, or sialic acid, but not mannose, glucose, or xylose. Depending on the sugars added, there are four common O-glycan core structures, cores 1 through 4, and an additional four, cores 5 though 8. Mucins are highly O-glycosylated glycoproteins ubiquitous in mucous secretions on cell surfaces and in body fluids. Mucin O-glycans can be branched, and many sugars or groups of sugars are antigenic. Important modifications of mucin O-glycans include O-acetylation of sialic acid and O-sulfation of galactose and N-acetylglucosamine.
Cell surface proteins can be attached to the cell membrane via the glycolipid structure called glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. Hundreds of GPI-anchored proteins have been identified in many eukaryotes ranging from protozoa and fungi to mammals. All protein-linked GPI anchors share a common core structure, characterized by the substructure Man (a14) GlcN (a1-6) myo-inositol-1P-lipid. Biosynthesis of GPI anchors proceeds in three stages: (i) preassembly of a GPI precursor in the ER membrane, (ii) attachment of the GPI to the C-terminus of a newly synthesized protein in the lumen of the ER, and (iii) lipid remodeling and / or carbohydrate side-chain modifications in the ER and the Golgi. Defects of GPI anchor biosynthesis gene result in a genetic disorder, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) eliminates DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by direct ligation. NHEJ involves binding of the KU heterodimer to double-stranded DNA ends, recruitment of DNA-PKcs (MRX complex in yeast), processing of ends, and recruitment of the DNA ligase IV (LIG4) -XRCC4 complex, which brings about ligation. A recent study shows that bacteria accomplish NHEJ using just two proteins (Ku and DNA ligase), whereas eukaryotes require many factors. NHEJ repairs DSBs at all stages of the cell cycle, bringing about the ligation of two DNA DSBs without the need for sequence homology, and so is error-prone.
Lysosomes are membrane-delimited organelles in animal cells serving as the cell's main digestive compartment to which all sorts of macromolecules are delivered for degradation. They contain more than 40 hydrolases in an acidic environment (pH of about 5). After synthesis in the ER, lysosomal enzymes are decorated with mannose-6-phosphate residues, which are recognized by mannose-6-phosphate receptors in the trans-Golgi network. They are packaged into clathrin-coated vesicles and are transported to late endosomes. Substances for digestion are acquired by the lysosomes via a series of processes including endocytosis, phagocytosis, and autophagy.
Contraction of the heart is a complex process initiated by the electrical excitation of cardiac myocytes (excitation-contraction coupling, ECC). In cardiac myocytes, Ca2 + influx induced by activation of voltage-dependent L-type Ca channels (DHP receptors) upon membrane depolarization triggers the release of Ca2 + via Ca2 + release channels (ryanodine receptors) of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) through a Ca2 + -induced Ca release (CICR) mechanism. Ca2 + ions released via the CICR mechanism diffuse through the cytosolic space to contractile proteins to bind to troponinC resulting in the release of inhibition induced by troponinI. The Ca2 + binding to troponinC thereby triggers the sliding of thin and thick filaments, that is, the activation of a crossbridge and subsequent cardiac force development and / or cell shortening. Recovery occurs as Ca2 + is pumped out of the cell by the Na + / Ca2 + exchanger (NCX) or is returned to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) by sarco (endo) plasmic Ca2 + -ATPase (SERCA) pumps on the non-junctional region of the SR.
All taste pathways are proposed to converge on common elements that mediate a rise in intracellular Ca2 + followed by neurotransmitter release. Na + salt depolarizes taste cells by passive influx of Na + through the amiloride-sensitive Na + channel (ENaC). Acids depolarize taste cells by a variety of mechanisms, including influx of protons (H +) through ENaC and a proton-gated cation channel (MDEG). Two putative umami receptors have been identified: a truncated variant of the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR4 and the heterodimer, T1R1 + T1R3. Umami receptors are coupled to a signaling pathway involving activation of PLCbeta2, production of IP3 and diacylglycerol, release of Ca2 + from intracellular stores and activation of a transient receptor potential channel, TRPM5. Bitter compounds, such as denatonium and PROP, activate particular T2R / TRB isoforms, which activate gustducin heterotrimers. Activated alpha-gustducin stimulates PDE to hydrolyze cAMP, whereas betagamma subunits activate PLCbeta2 to generate IP3, which leads to release of Ca2 + from internal stores. Artificial sweeteners activate GPCRs (T1R heterodimers) apparently linked via PLC to IP3 production and release of Ca2 + from intracellular stores. Sugars apparently activate GPCRs linked via AC to cAMP production which, in turn, may inhibit basolateral K + channels through phosphorylation by cAMP-activated protein kinase A (PKA).
One of the major tasks of the renal proximal tubule (PT) is to secrete acid into the tubule lumen, thereby reabsorbing approximately 80% of the filtered bicarbonate (HCO3 (-)), as well as generating new HCO3 (-) for regulating blood pH. In the tubular lumen, filtered HCO3 (-) combines with H (+) in a reaction catalyzed by CA IV. The CO2 thus produced rapidly diffuses into the tubular cells and is combined with water to produce intracellular H (+) and HCO3 (-), catalyzed by soluble cytoplasmic CA II. HCO3 (-) is then cotransported with Na (+) into blood via the NBC-1. The intracellular H (+) produced by CA II is secreted into the tubular lumen predominantly via the NHE-3. The PT creates the new HCO3 (-) by taking glutamine and metabolizing it to two molecules each of NH4 (+) and HCO3 (-). The NH4 (+) is excreted into the tubular lumen, and the HCO3 (-), which is new HCO3 (-), is returned to the blood, where it replaces the HCO3 (-) lost earlier in the titration of nonvolatile acids.
Eenteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) are closely related pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli. The hallmark of EPEC / EHEC infections is induction of attaching and effacing (A / E) lesions that damage intestinal epithelial cells. The capacity to form A / E lesions is encoded mainly by the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island. Tir, Map, EspF, EspG are known LEE-encoded effector proteins secreted via the type III secretion system, which is also LEE-encoded, into the host cell. EPEC and EHEC Tir's link the extracellular bacterium to the cell cytoskeleton. Map and EspF are involved in mitochondrion membrane permeabilization. EspG interacts with tubulins and stimulates microtubule destabilization. LEE-encoded adhesin or intimin (Eae) is exported via the general secretory pathway to the periplasm, where it is inserted into the outer membrane. In addition to Tir, two potential host cell-carried intimin receptors, beta1 integrin (ITGB1) and nucleolin (NCL), have so far been identified. The distinguishing feature of EHEC is the elaboration of Shiga-like toxin (Stx). Stx cleaves ribosomal RNA, thereby disrupting protein synthesis and killing the intoxicated epithelial or endothelial cells.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is characterized by circulating IgG autoantibodies that are specific for self-antigens, such as DNA, nuclear proteins and certain cytoplasmic components. Immune complexes comprising autoantibody and self-antigen is deposited particulary in the renal glomeruli and mediate a systemic inflammatory response by activating complement or via Fc-gamma-R-mediated neutrophil and macrophage activation. Activation of complement leads to injury both through formation of the membrane attack complex (C5b-9) or by generation of the anaphylatoxin and cell activator C5a. Neutrophils and macrophages cause tissue injury by the release of oxidants and proteases.
Primary immunodeficiencies (PIs) are a heterogeneous group of disorders, which affect cellular and humoral immunity or non-specific host defense mechanisms mediated by complement proteins, and cells such as phagocytes and natural killer (NK) cells. These disorders of the immune system cause increased susceptibility to infection, autoimmune disease, and malignancy. Most of PIs are due to genetic defects that affect cell maturation or function at different levels during hematopoiesis. Disruption of the cellular immunity is observed in patients with defects in T cells or both T and B cells. These cellular immunodeficiencies comprise 20% of all PIs. Disorders of humoral immunity affect B-cell differentiation and antibody production. They account for 70% of all PIs.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a primary myocardial disorder with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance that is characterized by hypertrophy of the left ventricles with histological features of myocyte hypertrophy, myofibrillar disarray, and interstitial fibrosis. HCM is one of the most common inherited cardiac disorders, with a prevalence in young adults of 1 in 500. Hundreds of mutations in 11 genes that encode protein constituents of the sarcomere have been identified in HCM. These mutations increase the Ca2 + sensitivity of cardiac myofilaments. Increased myofilament Ca2 + sensitivity is expected to increase the ATP utilization by actomyosin at submaximal Ca2 + concentrations, which might cause an imbalance in energy supply and demand in the heart under severe stress. The inefficient use of ATP suggests that an inability to maintain normal ATP levels could be the central abnormality. This theory might be supported by the discovery of the role of a mutant PRKAG2 gene in HCM, which in active form acts as a central sensing mechanism protecting cells from depletion of ATP supplies. The increase in the myofilament Ca2 + sensitivity well account for the diastolic dysfunction of model animals as well as human patients of HCM. It has been widely proposed that left ventricular hypertrophy is not a primary manifestation but develops as compensatory response to sarcomere dysfunction.
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is an inherited heart muscle disease that may result in arrhythmia, heart failure, and sudden death. The hallmark pathological findings are progressive myocyte loss and fibrofatty replacement, with a predilection for the right ventricle. A number of genetic studies have identified mutations in various components of the cardiac desmosome that have important roles in the pathogenesis of ARVD / C. Disruption of desmosomal function by defective proteins might lead to death of myocytes under mechanical stress. The myocardial injury may be accompanied by inflammation. Since regeneration of cardiac myocytes is limited, repair by fibrofatty replacement occurs. Several studies have implicated that desmosome dysfunction results in the delocalization and nuclear translocation of plakoglobin. As a result, competition between plakoglobin and beta-catenin will lead to the inhibition of Wnt / beta-catenin signaling, resulting in a shift from a myocyte fate towards an adipocyte fate of cells. The ryanodine receptor plays a crucial part in electromechanical coupling by control of release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol. Therefore, defects in this receptor could result in an imbalance of calcium homeostasis that might trigger cell death.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease characterised by dilation and impaired contraction of the left or both ventricles that results in progressive heart failure and sudden cardiac death from ventricular arrhythmia. Genetically inherited forms of DCM (familial DCM) have been identified in 25-35% of patients presenting with this disease, and the inherited gene defects are an important cause of familial DCM. The pathophysiology may be separated into two categories: defects in force generation and defects in force transmission. In cases where an underlying pathology cannot be identified, the patient is diagnosed with an idiopathic DCM. Current hypotheses regarding causes of idiopathic DCM focus on chronic viral myocarditis and / or on autoimmune abnormalities. Viral myocarditis may progress to an autoimmune phase and then to progressive cardiac dilatation. Antibodies to the beta1-adrenergic receptor (beta1AR), which are detected in a substantial number of patients with idiopathic DCM, may increase the concentration of intracellular cAMP and intracellular Ca2 +, a condition often leading to a transient hyper-performance of the heart followed by depressed heart function and heart failure.
Glycolysis is the process of converting glucose into pyruvate and generating small amounts of ATP (energy) and NADH (reducing power). It is a central pathway that produces important precursor metabolites: six-carbon compounds of glucose-6P and fructose-6P and three-carbon compounds of glycerone-P, glyceraldehyde-3P, glycerate-3P, phosphoenolpyruvate, and pyruvate. Acetyl-CoA, another important precursor metabolite, is produced by oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate. When the enzyme genes of this pathway are examined in completely sequenced genomes, the reaction steps of three-carbon compounds from glycerone-P to pyruvate form a conserved core module, which is found in almost all organisms and which often corresponds to operon structures in bacterial genomes. Gluconeogenesis is a synthesis pathway of glucose from noncarbohydrate precursors. It is essentially a reversal of glycolysis with minor variations of alternative paths.
The citrate cycle (TCA cycle, Krebs cycle) is an important aerobic pathway for the final steps of the oxidation of carbohydrates and fatty acids. The cycle starts with acetyl-CoA, the activated form of acetate, derived from glycolysis and pyruvate oxidation for carbohydrates and from beta oxidation of fatty acids. The two-carbon acetyl group in acetyl-CoA is transferred to the four-carbon compound of oxaloacetate to form the six-carbon compound of citrate. In a series of reactions two carbons in citrate are oxidized to CO2 and the reaction pathway supplies NADH for use in the oxidative phosphorylation and other metabolic processes. The pathway also supplies important precursor metabolites including 2-oxoglutarate. At the end of the cycle the remaining four-carbon part is transformed back to oxaloacetate. According to the genome sequence data, many organisms seem to lack genes for the full cycle, but contain genes for specific segments.
The pentose phosphate pathway is a process of glucose turnover that produces NADPH as reducing equivalents and pentoses as essential parts of nucleotides. There are two different phases in the pathway. One is irreversible oxidative phase in which glucose-6P is converted to ribulose-5P by oxidative decarboxylation, and NADPH is generated. The other is reversible non-oxidative phase in which phosphorylated sugars are interconverted to generate xylulose-5P, ribulose-5P, and ribose-5P. Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) formed from ribose-5P is an activated compound used in the biosynthesis of histidine and purine / pyrimidine nucleotides. This pathway map also shows the Entner-Doudoroff pathway where 6-P-gluconate is dehydrated and then cleaved into pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3P.
Bile acids are steroid carboxylic acids derived from cholesterol in vertebrates. The primary bile acids, cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, are synthesized in the liver and conjugated with taurine or glycine before secretion via bile into the intestine. The conversion from cholesterol to cholic and chenodeoxycholic acids involves four steps: 1) the initiation of synthesis by 7alpha-hydroxylation of sterol precursors, 2) further modifications to the ring structures, 3) side-chain oxidation and shortening (cleavage) by three carbons, and 4) conjugation of the bile acid with taurine or glycine.
Steroid hormones derived from cholesterol are a class of biologically active compounds in vertebrates. The cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme CYP11A1 catalyzes conversion of cholesterol, a C27 compound, to the first C21 steroid, pregnenolone, which is converted by a bifunctional enzyme complex to the gestagen hormone, progesterone. Pregnenolone and progesterone are the starting materials for the three groups of steroids: C21 steroids of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids, C19 steroids of androgens, and C18 steroids of estrogens. (i) Progesterone is converted by hydroxylations at carbons 21 and 11 to corticosterone, which is further modified by hydroxylation and oxydoreduction at carbon 18 to yield aldosterone, a mineralcorticoid. Cortisol, the main glucocorticoid, is formed from 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone with 11-deoxycortisol as an intermediate. (ii) Male hormone testosterone is formed from pregnenolone by two pathways, delta5 pathway via dehydroepiandrosterone and delta4 pathway via androstenedione. The enzyme CYP17A1 is responsible for the 17,20 lyase and 17alpha-hydroxylase activities in respective pathways. (iii) Female hormones estrone and estradiol are formed from testosterone and 4-androstene-3,17-dione by oxidative removal of the C19 methyl group and subsequent aromatization of ring A. In addition to these three groups, recent studies show that there is another group, termed neurosteroids, synthesized in the brain rather than the peripheral endocrine gland.
Serine is derived from 3-phospho-D-glycerate, an intermediate of glycolysis, and glycine is derived from serine. Threonine is an essential amino acid, which animals cannot synthesize. In bacteria and plants, threonine is derived from aspartate.
Cysteine and methionine are sulfur-containing amino acids. Cysteine is synthesized from serine through different pathways in different organism groups. In bacteria and plants, cysteine is converted from serine (via acetylserine) by transfer of hydrogen sulfide. In animals, methionine-derived homocysteine is used as sulfur source and its condensation product with serine (cystathionine) is converted to cysteine. Cysteine is metabolized to pyruvate in multiple routes. Methionine is an essential amino acid, which animals cannot synthesize. In bacteria and plants, methionine is synthesized from aspartate. S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM), synthesized from methionine and ATP, is a methyl group donor in many important transfer reactions including DNA methylation for regulation of gene expression. SAM may also be used to regenerate methionine in the methionine salvage pathway.
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are linear polysaccharide chains consisting of repeating disaccharide units and form proteglycans by covalently attaching to their core proteins. Chondroitin sulfate (CS) is a glycosaminoglycan with the disaccharide unit GalNAc (b1-4) GlcA (b1-3), modified with ester-linked sulfate at certain positions. Dermatan sulfate (DS) is a modified form of CS, in which a portion of D-glucuronate residues is epimerized to L-iduronates. CS and DS are linked to serine residues in core proteins via a linkage tetrasaccharide formed by the transfer of xylose and three more residues. The assembly process of CS is initiated by the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine to the linkage tetrasaccharide. The polymerization step is catalyzed by bifunctional enzymes (chondroitin synthases) that have both b13 glucuronosyltransferase and b14 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase activities. Chondroitin polymerization also requires the action of the chondroitin polymerizing factor. Sulfation of chondroitin in vertebrates is a complex process, with multiple sulfotransferases involved in 4-O sulfation and 6-O sulfation of N-acetylgalactosamine residues. Additional enzymes exist for epimerization of glucuronic acid to iduronic acid in DS, sulfation at the C-2 position of the uronic acids, and other patterns of sulfation found in unusual species of chondroitin.
The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters form one of the largest known protein families, and are widespread in bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. They couple ATP hydrolysis to active transport of a wide variety of substrates such as ions, sugars, lipids, sterols, peptides, proteins, and drugs. The structure of a prokaryotic ABC transporter usually consists of three components; typically two integral membrane proteins each having six transmembrane segments, two peripheral proteins that bind and hydrolyze ATP, and a periplasmic (or lipoprotein) substrate-binding protein. Many of the genes for the three components form operons as in fact observed in many bacterial and archaeal genomes. On the other hand, in a typical eukaryotic ABC transporter, the membrane spanning protein and the ATP-binding protein are fused, forming a multi-domain protein with the membrane-spanning domain (MSD) and the nucleotide-binding domain (NBD).
The correct processing, quality control and turnover of cellular RNA molecules are critical to many aspects in the expression of genetic information. In eukaryotes, two major pathways of mRNA decay exist and both pathways are initiated by poly (A) shortening of the mRNA. In the 5 'to 3' pathway, this is followed by decapping which then permits the 5 'to 3' exonucleolytic degradation of transcripts. In the 3 'to 5' pathway, the exosome, a large multisubunit complex, plays a key role. The exosome exists in archaeal cells, too. In bacteria, endoribonuclease E, a key enzyme involved in RNA decay and processing, organizes a protein complex called degradosome. RNase E or R interacts with the phosphate-dependent exoribonuclease polynucleotide phosphorylase, DEAD-box helicases, and additional factors in the RNA-degrading complex.
A complex network of interacting proteins and enzymes is required for DNA replication. Generally, DNA replication follows a multistep enzymatic pathway. At the DNA replication fork, a DNA helicase (DnaB or MCM complex) precedes the DNA synthetic machinery and unwinds the duplex parental DNA in cooperation with the SSB or RPA. On the leading strand, replication occurs continuously in a 5 to 3 direction, whereas on the lagging strand, DNA replication occurs discontinuously by synthesis and joining of short Okazaki fragments. In prokaryotes, the leading strand replication apparatus consists of a DNA polymerase (pol III core), a sliding clamp (beta), and a clamp loader (gamma delta complex). The DNA primase (DnaG) is needed to form RNA primers. Normally, during replication of the lagging-strand DNA template, an RNA primer is removed either by an RNase H or by the 5 to 3 exonuclease activity of DNA pol I, and the DNA ligase joins the Okazaki fragments. In eukaryotes, three DNA polymerases (alpha, delta, and epsilon) have been identified. DNA primase forms a permanent complex with DNA polymerase alpha. PCNA and RFC function as a clamp and a clamp loader. FEN 1 and RNase H1 remove the RNA from the Okazaki fragments and DNA ligase I joins the DNA.
After transcription, eukaryotic mRNA precursors contain protein-coding exons and noncoding introns. In the following splicing, introns are excised and exons are joined by a macromolecular complex, the spliceosome. The standard spliceosome is made up of five small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 snRNPs, and several spliceosome-associated proteins (SAPs). Spliceosomes are not a simple stable complex, but a dynamic family of particles that assemble on the mRNA precursor and help fold it into a conformation that allows transesterification to proceed. Various spliceosome forms (e.g. A-, B- and C-complexes) have been identified.
The proteasome is a protein-destroying apparatus involved in many essential cellular functions, such as regulation of cell cycle, cell differentiation, signal transduction pathways, antigen processing for appropriate immune responses, stress signaling, inflammatory responses, and apoptosis. It is capable of degrading a variety of cellular proteins in a rapid and timely fashion and most substrate proteins are modified by ubiquitin before their degradation by the proteasome. The proteasome is a large protein complex consisting of a proteolytic core called the 20S particle and ancillary factors that regulate its activity in various ways. The most common form is the 26S proteasome containing one 20S core particle and two 19S regulatory particles that enable the proteasome to degrade ubiquitinated proteins by an ATP-dependent mechanism. Another form is the immunoproteasome containing two 11S regulatory particles, PA28 alpha and PA28 beta, which are induced by interferon gamma under the conditions of intensified immune response. Other regulatory particles include PA28 gamma and PA200. Although PA28 gamma also belongs to a family of activators of the 20S proteasome, it is localized within the nucleus and forms a homoheptamer. PA28 gamma has been implicated in the regulation of cell cycle progression and apoptosis. PA200 has been identified as a large nuclear protein that stimulates proteasomal hydrolysis of peptides.
The protein export is the active transport of proteins from the cytoplasm to the exterior of the cell, or to the periplasmic compartment in Gram-negative bacteria. The sec dependent pathway is the general protein export system that transports newly synthesized proteins into or across the cell membrane. The translocation channel is formed from a conserved trimeric membrane protein complex, called the Sec61 / SecY complex. The twin-arginine translocation (Tat) pathway is another protein transport system that transports folded proteins in bacteria, archaea, and chloroplasts. Many Tat systems comprise three functionally different membrane proteins, TatA, TatB, and TatC, but TatA and TatE seem to have overlapping functions, with TatA having by far the more important role.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are nuclear hormone receptors that are activated by fatty acids and their derivatives. PPAR has three subtypes (PPARalpha, beta / delta, and gamma) showing different expression patterns in vertebrates. Each of them is encoded in a separate gene and binds fatty acids and eicosanoids. PPARalpha plays a role in the clearance of circulating or cellular lipids via the regulation of gene expression involved in lipid metabolism in liver and skeletal muscle. PPARbeta / delta is involved in lipid oxidation and cell proliferation. PPARgamma promotes adipocyte differentiation to enhance blood glucose uptake.
Base excision repair (BER) is the predominant DNA damage repair pathway for the processing of small base lesions, derived from oxidation and alkylation damages. BER is normally defined as DNA repair initiated by lesion-specific DNA glycosylases and completed by either of the two sub-pathways: short-patch BER where only one nucleotide is replaced and long-patch BER where 2-13 nucleotides are replaced. Each sub-pathway of BER relies on the formation of protein complexes that assemble at the site of the DNA lesion and facilitate repair in a coordinated fashion. This process of complex formation appears to provide an increase in specificity and efficiency to the BER pathway, thereby facilitating the maintenance of genome integrity by preventing the accumulation of highly toxic repair intermediates.
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is a mechanism to recognize and repair bulky DNA damage caused by compounds, environmental carcinogens, and exposure to UV-light. In humans hereditary defects in the NER pathway are linked to at least three diseases: xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), Cockayne syndrome (CS), and trichothiodystrophy (TTD). The repair of damaged DNA involves at least 30 polypeptides within two different sub-pathways of NER known as transcription-coupled repair (TCR-NER) and global genome repair (GGR-NER). TCR refers to the expedited repair of lesions located in the actively transcribed strand of genes by RNA polymerase II (RNAP II). In GGR-NER the first step of damage recognition involves XPC-hHR23B complex together with XPE complex (in prokaryotes, uvrAB complex). The following steps of GGR-NER and TCR-NER are similar.
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) is a highly conserved biological pathway that plays a key role in maintaining genomic stability. MMR corrects DNA mismatches generated during DNA replication, thereby preventing mutations from becoming permanent in dividing cells. MMR also suppresses homologous recombination and was recently shown to play a role in DNA damage signaling. Defects in MMR are associated with genome-wide instability, predisposition to certain types of cancer including HNPCC, resistance to certain chemotherapeutic agents, and abnormalities in meiosis and sterility in mammalian systems. The Escherichia coli MMR pathway has been extensively studied and is well characterized. In E. coli, the mismatch-activated MutS-MutL-ATP complex licenses MutH to incise the nearest unmethylated GATC sequence. UvrD and an exonuclease generate a gap. This gap is filled by pol III and DNA ligase. The GATC sites are then methylated by Dam. Several human MMR proteins have been identified based on their homology to E. coli MMR proteins. These include human homologs of MutS and MutL. Although E. coli MutS and MutL proteins are homodimers, human MutS and MutL homologs are heterodimers. The role of hemimethylated dGATC sites as a signal for strand discrimination is not conserved from E. coli to human. Human MMR is presumed to be nick-directed in vivo, and is thought to discriminate daughter and template strands using a strand-specific nick.
Homologous recombination (HR) is essential for the accurate repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), potentially lethal lesions. HR takes place in the late S-G2 phase of the cell cycle and involves the generation of a single-stranded region of DNA, followed by strand invasion, formation of a Holliday junction, DNA synthesis using the intact strand as a template, branch migration and resolution. It is investigated that RecA / Rad51 family proteins play a central role. The breast cancer susceptibility protein Brca2 and the RecQ helicase BLM (Bloom syndrome mutated) are tumor suppressors that maintain genome integrity, at least in part, through HR.
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade is a highly conserved module that is involved in various cellular functions, including cell proliferation, differentiation and migration. Mammals express at least four distinctly regulated groups of MAPKs, extracellular signal-related kinases (ERK) -1 / 2, Jun amino-terminal kinases (JNK1 / 2 / 3), p38 proteins (p38alpha / beta / gamma / delta) and ERK5, that are activated by specific MAPKKs: MEK1 / 2 for ERK1 / 2, MKK3 / 6 for the p38, MKK4 / 7 (JNKK1 / 2) for the JNKs, and MEK5 for ERK5. Each MAPKK, however, can be activated by more than one MAPKKK, increasing the complexity and diversity of MAPK signalling. Presumably each MAPKKK confers responsiveness to distinct stimuli. For example, activation of ERK1 / 2 by growth factors depends on the MAPKKK c-Raf, but other MAPKKKs may activate ERK1 / 2 in response to pro-inflammatory stimuli.
The ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) couples binding of extracellular growth factor ligands to intracellular signaling pathways regulating diverse biologic responses, including proliferation, differentiation, cell motility, and survival. Ligand binding to the four closely related members of this RTK family -epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR, also known as ErbB-1 or HER1), ErbB-2 (HER2), ErbB-3 (HER3), and ErbB-4 (HER4) -induces the formation of receptor homo- and heterodimers and the activation of the intrinsic kinase domain, resulting in phosphorylation on specific tyrosine residues (pY) within the cytoplasmic tail. Signaling effectors containing binding pockets for pY-containing peptides are recruited to activated receptors and induce the various signaling pathways. The Shc- and / or Grb2-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is a common target downstream of all ErbB receptors. Similarly, the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI-3K) pathway is directly or indirectly activated by most ErbBs. Several cytoplasmic docking proteins appear to be recruited by specific ErbB receptors and less exploited by others. These include the adaptors Crk, Nck, the phospholipase C gamma (PLCgamma), the intracellular tyrosine kinase Src, or the Cbl E3 ubiquitin protein ligase.
Ca2 + that enters the cell from the outside is a principal source of signal Ca2 +. Entry of Ca2 + is driven by the presence of a large electrochemical gradient across the plasma membrane. Cells use this external source of signal Ca2 + by activating various entry channels with widely different properties. The voltage-operated channels (VOCs) are found in excitable cells and generate the rapid Ca2 + fluxes that control fast cellular processes. There are many other Ca2 + -entry channels, such as the receptor-operated channels (ROCs), for example the NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors (NMDARs) that respond to glutamate. There also are second-messenger-operated channels (SMOCs) and store-operated channels (SOCs). The other principal source of Ca2 + for signalling is the internal stores that are located primarily in the endoplasmic / sarcoplasmic reticulum (ER / SR), in which inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (IP3Rs) or ryanodine receptors (RYRs) regulate the release of Ca2 +. The principal activator of these channels is Ca2 + itself and this process of Ca2 + -induced Ca2 + release is central to the mechanism of Ca2 + signalling. Various second messengers or modulators also control the release of Ca2 +. IP3, which is generated by pathways using different isoforms of phospholipase C (PLCbeta, delta, epsilon, gamma and zeta), regulates the IP3Rs. Cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) releases Ca2 + via RYRs. Nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP) may activate a distinct Ca2 + release mechanism on separate acidic Ca2 + stores. Ca2 + release via the NAADP-sensitive mechanism may also feedback onto either RYRs or IP3Rs. cADPR and NAADP are generated by CD38. This enzyme might be sensitive to the cellular metabolism, as ATP and NADH inhibit it. The influx of Ca2 + from the environment or release from internal stores causes a very rapid and dramatic increase in cytoplasmic calcium concentration, which has been widely exploited for signal transduction. Some proteins, such as troponin C (TnC) involved in muscle contraction, directly bind to and sense Ca2 +. However, in other cases Ca2 + is sensed through intermediate calcium sensors such as calmodulin (CALM).
Cytokines are soluble extracellular proteins or glycoproteins that are crucial intercellular regulators and mobilizers of cells engaged in innate as well as adaptive inflammatory host defenses, cell growth, differentiation, cell death, angiogenesis, and development and repair processes aimed at the restoration of homeostasis. Cytokines are released by various cells in the body, usually in response to an activating stimulus, and they induce responses through binding to specific receptors on the cell surface of target cells. Cytokines can be grouped by structure into different families and their receptors can likewise be grouped.
Inflammatory immune response requires the recruitment of leukocytes to the site of inflammation upon foreign insult. Chemokines are small chemoattractant peptides that provide directional cues for the cell trafficking and thus are vital for protective host response. In addition, chemokines regulate plethora of biological processes of hematopoietic cells to lead cellular activation, differentiation and survival. The chemokine signal is transduced by chemokine receptors (G-protein coupled receptors) expressed on the immune cells. After receptor activation, the alpha- and beta-gamma-subunits of G protein dissociate to activate diverse downstream pathways resulting in cellular polarization and actin reorganization. Various members of small GTPases are involved in this process. Induction of nitric oxide and production of reactive oxygen species are as well regulated by chemokine signal via calcium mobilization and diacylglycerol production.
Mitotic cell cycle progression is accomplished through a reproducible sequence of events, DNA replication (S phase) and mitosis (M phase) separated temporally by gaps known as G1 and G2 phases. Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are key regulatory enzymes, each consisting of a catalytic CDK subunit and an activating cyclin subunit. CDKs regulate the cell's progression through the phases of the cell cycle by modulating the activity of key substrates. Downstream targets of CDKs include transcription factor E2F and its regulator Rb. Precise activation and inactivation of CDKs at specific points in the cell cycle are required for orderly cell division. Cyclin-CDK inhibitors (CKIs), such as p16Ink4a, p15Ink4b, p27Kip1, and p21Cip1, are involved in the negative regulation of CDK activities, thus providing a pathway through which the cell cycle is negatively regulated. Eukaryotic cells respond to DNA damage by activating signaling pathways that promote cell cycle arrest and DNA repair. In response to DNA damage, the checkpoint kinase ATM phosphorylates and activates Chk2, which in turn directly phosphorylates and activates p53 tumor suppressor protein. p53 and its transcriptional targets play an important role in both G1 and G2 checkpoints. ATR-Chk1-mediated protein degradation of Cdc25A protein phosphatase is also a mechanism conferring intra-S-phase checkpoint activation.
During meiosis, a single round of DNA replication is followed by two rounds of chromosome segregation, called meiosis I and meiosis II. At meiosis I, homologous chromosomes recombine and then segregate to opposite poles, while the sister chromatids segregate from each other at meoisis II. In vertebrates, immature oocytes are arrested at the PI (prophase of meiosis I). The resumption of meiosis is stimulated by progesterone, which carries the oocyte through two consecutive M-phases (MI and MII) to a second arrest at MII. The key activity driving meiotic progression is the MPF (maturation-promoting factor), a heterodimer of CDC2 (cell division cycle 2 kinase) and cyclin B. In PI-arrested oocytes, MPF is initially inactive and is activated by the dual-specificity CDC25C phosphatase as the result of new synthesis of Mos induced by progesterone. MPF activation mediates the transition from the PI arrest to MI. The subsequent decrease in MPF levels, required to exit from MI into interkinesis, is induced by a negative feedback loop, where CDC2 brings about the activation of the APC (anaphase-promoting complex), which mediates destruction of cyclin B. Re-activation of MPF for MII requires re-accumulation of high levels of cyclin B as well as the inactivation of the APC by newly synthesized Emi2 and other components of the CSF (cytostatic factor), such as cyclin E or high levels of Mos. CSF antagonizes the ubiquitin ligase activity of the APC, preventing cyclin B destruction and meiotic exit until fertilization occurs. Fertilization triggers a transient increase in cytosolic free Ca2 +, which leads to CSF inactivation and cyclin B destruction through the APC. Then eggs are released from MII into the first embryonic cell cycle.
p53 activation is induced by a number of stress signals, including DNA damage, oxidative stress and activated oncogenes. The p53 protein is employed as a transcriptional activator of p53-regulated genes. This results in three major outputs; cell cycle arrest, cellular senescence or apoptosis. Other p53-regulated gene functions communicate with adjacent cells, repair the damaged DNA or set up positive and negative feedback loops that enhance or attenuate the functions of the p53 protein and integrate these stress responses with other signal transduction pathways.
Protein ubiquitination plays an important role in eukaryotic cellular processes. It mainly functions as a signal for 26S proteasome dependent protein degradation. The addition of ubiquitin to proteins being degraded is performed by a reaction cascade consisting of three enzymes, named E1 (ubiquitin activating enzyme), E2 (ubiquitin conjugating enzyme), and E3 (ubiquitin ligase). Each E3 has specificity to its substrate, or proteins to be targeted by ubiquitination. Many E3s are discovered in eukaryotes and they are classified into four types: HECT type, U-box type, single RING-finger type, and multi-subunit RING-finger type. Multi-subunit RING-finger E3s are exemplified by cullin-Rbx E3s and APC / C. They consist of a RING-finger-containing subunit (RBX1 or RBX2) that functions to bind E2s, a scaffold-like cullin molecule, adaptor proteins, and a target recognizing subunit that binds substrates.
Endocytosis is a mechanism for cells to remove ligands, nutrients, and plasma membrane (PM) proteins, and lipids from the cell surface, bringing them into the cell interior. Transmembrane proteins entering through clathrin-dependent endocytosis (CDE) have sequences in their cytoplasmic domains that bind to the APs (adaptor-related protein complexes) and enable their rapid removal from the PM. In addition to APs and clathrin, there are numerous accessory proteins including dynamin. Depending on the various proteins that enter the endosome membrane, these cargoes are sorted to distinct destinations. Some cargoes, such as nutrient receptors, are recycled back to the PM. Ubiquitylated membrane proteins, such as activated growth-factor receptors, are sorted into intraluminal vesicles and eventually end up in the lysosome lumen via multivesicular endosomes (MVEs). There are distinct mechanisms of clathrin-independent endocytosis (CIE) depending upon the cargo and the cell type.
Peroxisomes are essential organelles that play a key role in redox signalling and lipid homeostasis. They contribute to many crucial metabolic processes such as fatty acid oxidation, biosynthesis of ether lipids and free radical detoxification. The biogenesis of peroxisomes starts with the early peroxins PEX3, PEX16 and PEX19 and proceeds via several steps. The import of membrane proteins into peroxisomes needs PEX19 for recognition, targeting and insertion via docking at PEX3. Matrix proteins in the cytosol are recognized by peroxisomal targeting signals (PTS) and transported to the docking complex at the peroxisomal membrane. Peroxisomes' deficiencies lead to severe and often fatal inherited peroxisomal disorders (PD). PDs are usually classified in two groups. The first group is disorders of peroxisome biogenesis which include Zellweger syndrome, and the second group is single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies.
Apoptosis is a genetically controlled mechanisms of cell death involved in the regulation of tissue homeostasis. The 2 major pathways of apoptosis are the extrinsic (Fas and other TNFR superfamily members and ligands) and the intrinsic (mitochondria-associated) pathways, both of which are found in the cytoplasm. The extrinsic pathway is triggered by death receptor engagement, which initiates a signaling cascade mediated by caspase-8 activation. Caspase-8 both feeds directly into caspase-3 activation and stimulates the release of cytochrome c by the mitochondria. Caspase-3 activation leads to the degradation of cellular proteins necessary to maintain cell survival and integrity. The intrinsic pathway occurs when various apoptotic stimuli trigger the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria (independently of caspase-8 activation). Cytochrome c interacts with Apaf-1 and caspase-9 to promote the activation of caspase-3. Recent studies point to the ER as a third subcellular compartment implicated in apoptotic execution. Alterations in Ca2 + homeostasis and accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER cause ER stress. Prolonged ER stress can result in the activation of BAD and / or caspase-12, and execute apoptosis.
The vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) is a highly specialized cell whose principal function is contraction. On contraction, VSMCs shorten, thereby decreasing the diameter of a blood vessel to regulate the blood flow and pressure. The principal mechanisms that regulate the contractile state of VSMCs are changes in cytosolic Ca2 + concentration (c). In response to vasoconstrictor stimuli, Ca2 + is mobilized from intracellular stores and / or the extracellular space to increase c in VSMCs. The increase in c, in turn, activates the Ca2 + -CaM-MLCK pathway and stimulates MLC20 phosphorylation, leading to myosin-actin interactions and, hence, the development of contractile force. The sensitivity of contractile myofilaments or MLC20 phosphorylation to Ca2 + can be secondarily modulated by other signaling pathways. During receptor stimulation, the contractile force is greatly enhanced by the inhibition of myosin phosphatase. Rho / Rho kinase, PKC, and arachidonic acid have been proposed to play a pivotal role in this enhancement. The signaling events that mediate relaxation include the removal of a contractile agonist (passive relaxation) and activation of cyclic nucleotide-dependent signaling pathways in the continued presence of a contractile agonist (active relaxation). Active relaxation occurs through the inhibition of both Ca2 + mobilization and myofilament Ca2 + sensitivity in VSMCs.
Wnt proteins are secreted morphogens that are required for basic developmental processes, such as cell-fate specification, progenitor-cell proliferation and the control of asymmetric cell division, in many different species and organs. There are at least three different Wnt pathways: the canonical pathway, the planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway and the Wnt / Ca2 + pathway. In the canonical Wnt pathway, the major effect of Wnt ligand binding to its receptor is the stabilization of cytoplasmic beta-catenin through inhibition of the bea-catenin degradation complex. Beta-catenin is then free to enter the nucleus and activate Wnt-regulated genes through its interaction with TCF (T-cell factor) family transcription factors and concomitant recruitment of coactivators. Planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling leads to the activation of the small GTPases RHOA (RAS homologue gene-family member A) and RAC1, which activate the stress kinase JNK (Jun N-terminal kinase) and ROCK (RHO-associated coiled-coil-containing protein kinase 1) and leads to remodelling of the cytoskeleton and changes in cell adhesion and motility. WNT-Ca2 + signalling is mediated through G proteins and phospholipases and leads to transient increases in cytoplasmic free calcium that subsequently activate the kinase PKC (protein kinase C) and CAMKII (calcium calmodulin mediated kinase II) and the phosphatase calcineurin.
The Notch signaling pathway is an evolutionarily conserved, intercellular signaling mechanism essential for proper embryonic development in all metazoan organisms in the Animal kingdom. The Notch proteins (Notch1-Notch4 in vertebrates) are single-pass receptors that are activated by the Delta (or Delta-like) and Jagged / Serrate families of membrane-bound ligands. They are transported to the plasma membrane as cleaved, but otherwise intact polypeptides. Interaction with ligand leads to two additional proteolytic cleavages that liberate the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) from the plasma membrane. The NICD translocates to the nucleus, where it forms a complex with the DNA binding protein CSL, displacing a histone deacetylase (HDAc) -co-repressor (CoR) complex from CSL. Components of an activation complex, such as MAML1 and histone acetyltransferases (HATs), are recruited to the NICD-CSL complex, leading to the transcriptional activation of Notch target genes.
The Hedgehog (Hh) family of secreted signaling proteins plays a crucial role in development of diverse animal phyla, from Drosophila to humans, regulating morphogenesis of a variety of tissues and organs. Hh signaling is also involved in control of stem cell proliferation in adult tissues and aberrant activation of the Hh pathway has been linked to multiple types of human cancer. Members of the Hh family bind to patched (ptc), thus releasing smoothened (smo) to transduce a signal. Transcriptional activation occurs through the GLI family of proteins resulting in activation of target genes.
The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family members, which include TGF-betas, activins and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), are structurally related secreted cytokines found in species ranging from worms and insects to mammals. A wide spectrum of cellular functions such as proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and migration are regulated by TGF-beta family members. TGF-beta family member binds to the Type II receptor and recruits Type I, whereby Type II receptor phosphorylates and activates Type I. The Type I receptor, in turn, phosphorylates receptor-activated Smads (R-Smads: Smad1, Smad2, Smad3, Smad5, and Smad8). Once phosphorylated, R-Smads associate with the co-mediator Smad, Smad4, and the heteromeric complex then translocates into the nucleus. In the nucleus, Smad complexes activate specific genes through cooperative interactions with other DNA-binding and coactivator (or co-repressor) proteins.
Axon guidance represents a key stage in the formation of neuronal network. Axons are guided by a variety of guidance factors, such as netrins, ephrins, Slits, and semaphorins. These guidance cues are read by growth cone receptors, and signal transduction pathways downstream of these receptors converge onto the Rho GTPases to elicit changes in cytoskeletal organization that determine which way the growth cone will turn.
There is now much evidence that VEGFR-2 is the major mediator of VEGF-driven responses in endothelial cells and it is considered to be a crucial signal transducer in both physiologic and pathologic angiogenesis. The binding of VEGF to VEGFR-2 leads to a cascade of different signaling pathways, resulting in the up-regulation of genes involved in mediating the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells and promoting their survival and vascular permeability. For example, the binding of VEGF to VEGFR-2 leads to dimerization of the receptor, followed by intracellular activation of the PLCgamma; PKC-Raf kinase-MEK-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and subsequent initiation of DNA synthesis and cell growth, whereas activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3 '-kinase (PI3K) -Akt pathway leads to increased endothelial-cell survival. Activation of PI3K, FAK, and p38 MAPK is implicated in cell migration signaling.
Cell-matrix adhesions play essential roles in important biological processes including cell motility, cell proliferation, cell differentiation, regulation of gene expression and cell survival. At the cell-extracellular matrix contact points, specialized structures are formed and termed focal adhesions, where bundles of actin filaments are anchored to transmembrane receptors of the integrin family through a multi-molecular complex of junctional plaque proteins. Some of the constituents of focal adhesions participate in the structural link between membrane receptors and the actin cytoskeleton, while others are signalling molecules, including different protein kinases and phosphatases, their substrates, and various adapter proteins. Integrin signaling is dependent upon the non-receptor tyrosine kinase activities of the FAK and src proteins as well as the adaptor protein functions of FAK, src and Shc to initiate downstream signaling events. These signalling events culminate in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton; a prerequisite for changes in cell shape and motility, and gene expression. Similar morphological alterations and modulation of gene expression are initiated by the binding of growth factors to their respective receptors, emphasizing the considerable crosstalk between adhesion- and growth factor-mediated signalling.
The extracellular matrix (ECM) consists of a complex mixture of structural and functional macromolecules and serves an important role in tissue and organ morphogenesis and in the maintenance of cell and tissue structure and function. Specific interactions between cells and the ECM are mediated by transmembrane molecules, mainly integrins and perhaps also proteoglycans, CD36, or other cell-surface-associated components. These interactions lead to a direct or indirect control of cellular activities such as adhesion, migration, differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. In addition, integrins function as mechanoreceptors and provide a force-transmitting physical link between the ECM and the cytoskeleton. Integrins are a family of glycosylated, heterodimeric transmembrane adhesion receptors that consist of noncovalently bound alpha- and beta-subunits.
Cell adhesion molecules are (glyco) proteins expressed on the cell surface and play a critical role in a wide array of biologic processes that include hemostasis, the immune response, inflammation, embryogenesis, and development of neuronal tissue. There are four main groups: the integrin family, the immunoglobulin superfamily, selectins, and cadherins. Membrane proteins that mediate immune cellcell interactions fall into different categories, namely those involved in antigen recognition, costimulation and cellular adhesion. Furthermore cell-cell adhesions are important for brain morphology and highly coordinated brain functions such as memory and learning. During early development of the nervous system, neurons elongate their axons towards their targets and establish and maintain synapses through formation of cell-cell adhesions. Cell-cell adhesions also underpin axon-axon contacts and link neurons with supporting schwann cells and oligodendrocytes.
Cell-cell adherens junctions (AJs), the most common type of intercellular adhesions, are important for maintaining tissue architecture and cell polarity and can limit cell movement and proliferation. At AJs, E-cadherin serves as an essential cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). The cytoplasmic tail binds beta-catenin, which in turn binds alpha-catenin. Alpha-catenin is associated with F-actin bundles directly and indirectly. The integrity of the cadherin-catenin complex is negatively regulated by phosphorylation of beta-catenin by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases (Fer, Fyn, Yes, and Src), which leads to dissociation of the cadherin-catenin complex. Integrity of this complex is positively regulated by beta -catenin phosphorylation by casein kinase II, and dephosphorylation by protein tyrosine phosphatases. Changes in the phosphorylation state of beta-catenin affect cell-cell adhesion, cell migration and the level of signaling beta-catenin. Wnt signaling acts as a positive regulator of beta-catenin by inhibiting beta-catenin degradation, which stabilizes beta-catenin, and causes its accumulation. Cadherin may acts as a negative regulator of signaling beta-catenin as it binds beta-catenin at the cell surface and thereby sequesters it from the nucleus. Nectins also function as CAMs at AJs, but are more highly concentrated at AJs than E-cadherin. Nectins transduce signals through Cdc42 and Rac, which reorganize the actin cytoskeleton, regulate the formation of AJs, and strengthen cell-cell adhesion.
Epithelial tight junctions (TJs) are composed of at least three types of transmembrane protein -occludin, claudin and junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) - and a cytoplasmic 'plaque' consisting of many different proteins that form large complexes. The transmembrane proteins mediate cell adhesion and are thought to constitute the intramembrane and paracellular diffusion barriers. The cytoplasmic 'plaque' contains three major multi-protein complexes consisting largely of scaffolding proteins, the ZO protein complex, the CRB3-Pals1-PATJ complex and the PAR-3-aPKC-PAR-6 complex. The ZO protein complex appears to organize the transmembrane proteins and couple them to other cytoplasmic proteins and to actin microfilaments. Two evolutionarily conserved protein complexes, the CRB3 and PAR complexes are involved in the establishment and maintenance of epithelial cell polarity. Besides these three protein complexes which seem to be constitutively associated at TJs, a number of proteins with different functions has been identified at TJs. These include additional scaffolding proteins like MUPP1 and MAGI-1, adaptor proteins, transcription regulators and RNA processing factors, regulatory proteins like small GTPases and G-proteins, kinases and phosphatases, and heat shock proteins. These are proposed to be involved in junction assembly, barrier regulation, gene transcription, and perhaps other, presently undefined pathways.
Gap junctions contain intercellular channels that allow direct communication between the cytosolic compartments of adjacent cells. Each gap junction channel is formed by docking of two 'hemichannels', each containing six connexins, contributed by each neighboring cell. These channels permit the direct transfer of small molecules including ions, amino acids, nucleotides, second messengers and other metabolites between adjacent cells. Gap junctional communication is essential for many physiological events, including embryonic development, electrical coupling, metabolic transport, apoptosis, and tissue homeostasis. Communication through Gap Junction is sensitive to a variety of stimuli, including changes in the level of intracellular Ca2 +, pH, transjunctional applied voltage and phosphorylation / dephosphorylation processes. This figure represents the possible activation routes of different protein kinases involved in Cx43 and Cx36 phosphorylation.
Blood coagulation is a series of coordinated and calcium-dependent proenzyme-to-serine protease conversions likely to be localized on the surfaces of activated cells in vivo. It culminates in the formation of thrombin, the enzyme responsible for the conversion of soluble fibrinogen to the insoluble fibrin clot. The kallikrein-kinin system is an endogenous metabolic cascade, triggering of which results in the release of vasoactive kinins (bradykinin-related peptides). Kinin peptides are implicated in many physiological and pathological processes including the regulation of blood pressure and sodium homeostasis, inflammatory processes, and the cardioprotective effects of preconditioning. Complement is a system of plasma proteins that is activated by the presence of pathogens. There are three pathways of complement activation: the classical pathway, the lectin pathway, and the alternative pathway. All of these pathways generate a crucial enzymatic activity that, intern, generates the effector molecules of complement. The three main consequences of complement activation are the opsonization of pathogens, the recruitment of inflammatory and immunocompetent cells, and the direct killing of pathogens.
Specific families of pattern recognition receptors are responsible for detecting microbial pathogens and generating innate immune responses. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are membrane-bound receptors identified as homologs of Toll in Drosophila. Mammalian TLRs are expressed on innate immune cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and respond to the membrane components of Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria. Pathogen recognition by TLRs provokes rapid activation of innate immunity by inducing production of proinflammatory cytokines and upregulation of costimulatory molecules. TLR signaling pathways are separated into two groups: a MyD88-dependent pathway that leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines with quick activation of NF- {kappa} B and MAPK, and a MyD88-independent pathway associated with the induction of IFN-beta and IFN-inducible genes, and maturation of dendritic cells with slow activation of NF- {kappa} B and MAPK.
Specific families of pattern recognition receptors are responsible for detecting various pathogens and generating innate immune responses. The intracellular NOD-like receptor (NLR) family contains more than 20 members in mammals and plays a pivotal role in the recognition of intracellular ligands. NOD1 and NOD2, two prototypic NLRs, sense the cytosolic presence of the bacterial peptidoglycan fragments that escaped from endosomal compartments, driving the activation of NF- {kappa} B and MAPK, cytokine production and apoptosis. On the other hand, a different set of NLRs induces caspase-1 activation through the assembly of multiprotein complexes called inflammasomes. These NLRs include NALP1, NALP3 and Ipaf. The inflammasomes are critical for generating mature proinflammatory cytokines in concert with Toll-like receptor signaling pathway.
Specific families of pattern recognition receptors are responsible for detecting viral pathogens and generating innate immune responses. Non-self RNA appearing in a cell as a result of intracellular viral replication is recognized by a family of cytosolic RNA helicases termed RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs). The RLR proteins include RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2 and are expressed in both immune and nonimmune cells. Upon recognition of viral nucleic acids, RLRs recruit specific intracellular adaptor proteins to initiate signaling pathways that lead to the synthesis of type I interferon and other inflammatory cytokines, which are important for eliminating viruses.
Specific families of pattern recognition receptors are responsible for detecting foreign DNA from invading microbes or host cells and generating innate immune responses. DAI is the first identified sensor of cytosolic DNA which activates the IRF and NF- {kappa} B transcription factors, leading to production of type I interferon and other cytokines. The second type of cytoplasmic DNA sensor is AIM2. Upon sensing DNA, AIM2 triggers the assembly of the inflammasome, culminating in interleukin maturation. In addition to these receptors, there is a mechanism to sense foreign DNA, with the host RNA polymerase III converting the DNA into RNA for recognition by the RNA sensor RIG-I. These pathways provide various means to alert the cell.
The Janus kinase / signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK / STAT) pathway is one of a handful of pleiotropic cascades used to transduce a multitude of signals for development and homeostasis in animals, from humans to flies. In mammals, the JAK / STAT pathway is the principal signaling mechanism for a wide array of cytokines and growth factors. Following the binding of cytokines to their cognate receptor, STATs are activated by members of the JAK family of tyrosine kinases. Once activated, they dimerize and translocate to the nucleus and modulate the expression of target genes. In addition to the activation of STATs, JAKs mediate the recruitment of other molecules such as the MAP kinases, PI3 kinase etc. These molecules process downstream signals via the Ras-Raf-MAP kinase and PI3 kinase pathways which results in the activation of additional transcription factors.
Blood-cell development progresses from a hematopoietic stem cell (HSC), which can undergo either self-renewal or differentiation into a multilineage committed progenitor cell: a common lymphoid progenitor (CLP) or a common myeloid progenitor (CMP). A CLP gives rise to the lymphoid lineage of white blood cells or leukocytes-the natural killer (NK) cells and the T and B lymphocytes. A CMP gives rise to the myeloid lineage, which comprises the rest of the leukocytes, the erythrocytes (red blood cells), and the megakaryocytes that produce platelets important in blood clotting. Cells undergoing these differentiation process express a stage- and lineage-specific set of surface markers. Therefore cellular stages are identified by the specific expression patterns of these genes.
Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes of the innate immune system that are involved in early defenses against both allogeneic (nonself) cells and autologous cells undergoing various forms of stress, such as infection with viruses, bacteria, or parasites or malignant transformation. Although NK cells do not express classical antigen receptors of the immunoglobulin gene family, such as the antibodies produced by B cells or the T cell receptor expressed by T cells, they are equipped with various receptors whose engagement allows them to discriminate between target and nontarget cells. Activating receptors bind ligands on the target cell surface and trigger NK cell activation and target cell lysis. However Inhibitory receptors recognize MHC class I molecules (HLA) and inhibit killing by NK cells by overruling the actions of the activating receptors. This inhibitory signal is lost when the target cells do not express MHC class I and perhaps also in cells infected with virus, which might inhibit MHC class I exprssion or alter its conformation. The mechanism of NK cell killing is the same as that used by the cytotoxic T cells generated in an adaptive immune response; cytotoxic granules are released onto the surface of the bound target cell, and the effector proteins they contain penetrate the cell membrane and induce programmed cell death.
Activation of T lymphocytes is a key event for an efficient response of the immune system. It requires the involvement of the T-cell receptor (TCR) as well as costimulatory molecules such as CD28. Engagement of these receptors through the interaction with a foreign antigen associated with major histocompatibility complex molecules and CD28 counter-receptors B7.1 / B7.2, respectively, results in a series of signaling cascades. These cascades comprise an array of protein-tyrosine kinases, phosphatases, GTP-binding proteins and adaptor proteins that regulate generic and specialised functions, leading to T-cell proliferation, cytokine production and differentiation into effector cells.
B cells are an important component of adaptive immunity. They produce and secrete millions of different antibody molecules, each of which recognizes a different (foreign) antigen. The B cell receptor (BCR) is an integral membrane protein complex that is composed of two immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chains, two Ig light chains and two heterodimers of Ig-alpha and Ig-beta. After BCR ligation by antigen, three main protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) -the SRC-family kinase LYN, SYK and the TEC-family kinase BTK- are activated. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase C-gamma 2 (PLC-gamma 2) are important downstream effectors of BCR signalling. This signalling ultimately results in the expression of immediate early genes that further activate the expression of other genes involved in B cell proliferation, differentiation and Ig production as well as other processes.
Fc epsilon RI-mediated signaling pathways in mast cells are initiated by the interaction of antigen (Ag) with IgE bound to the extracellular domain of the alpha chain of Fc epsilon RI. The activation pathways are regulated both positively and negatively by the interactions of numerous signaling molecules. Mast cells that are thus activated release preformed granules which contain biogenic amines (especially histamines) and proteoglycans (especially heparin). The activation of phospholipase A2 causes the release of membrane lipids followed by development of lipid mediators such as leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4) and prostaglandins (especially PDG2). There is also secretion of cytokines, the most important of which are TNF-alpha, IL-4 and IL-5. These mediators and cytokines contribute to inflammatory responses.
Phagocytosis plays an essential role in host-defense mechanisms through the uptake and destruction of infectious pathogens. Specialized cell types including macrophages, neutrophils, and monocytes take part in this process in higher organisms. After opsonization with antibodies (IgG), foreign extracellular materials are recognized by Fc gamma receptors. Cross-linking of Fc gamma receptors initiates a variety of signals mediated by tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple proteins, which lead through the actin cytoskeleton rearrangements and membrane remodeling to the formation of phagosomes. Nascent phagosomes undergo a process of maturation that involves fusion with lysosomes. The acquisition of lysosomal proteases and release of reactive oxygen species are crucial for digestion of engulfed materials in phagosomes.
Leukocyte migaration from the blood into tissues is vital for immune surveillance and inflammation. During this diapedesis of leukocytes, the leukocytes bind to endothelial cell adhesion molecules (CAM) and then migrate across the vascular endothelium. A leukocyte adherent to CAMs on the endothelial cells moves forward by leading-edge protrusion and retraction of its tail. In this process, alphaL / beta2 integrin activates through Vav1, RhoA, which subsequently activates the kinase p160ROCK. ROCK activation leads to MLC phosphorylation, resulting in retraction of the actin cytoskeleton. Moreover, Leukocytes activate endothelial cell signals that stimulate endothelial cell retraction during localized dissociation of the endothelial cell junctions. ICAM-1-mediated signals activate an endothelial cell calcium flux and PKC, which are required for ICAM-1 dependent leukocyte migration. VCAM-1 is involved in the opening of the endothelial passage through which leukocytes can extravasate. In this regard, VCAM-1 ligation induces NADPH oxidase activation and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a Rac-mediated manner, with subsequent activation of matrix metallopoteinases and loss of VE-cadherin-mediated adhesion.
The intestine is the largest lymphoid tissue in the body. One striking feature of intestinal immunity is its ability to generate great amounts of noninflammatory immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies that serve as the first line of defense against microorganisms. The basic map of IgA production includes induction of mucosal B cells in the Peyer's patches, circulation through the bloodstream and homing to intestinal mucosa of IgA-commited plasma cells, and local antibody production for export across the intestinal membranes. Multiple cytokines, including TGF- {beta}, IL-10, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-6, are required to promote IgA class switching and terminal differentiation process of the B cells. Secreted IgA promotes immune exclusion by entrapping dietary antigens and microorganisms in the mucus and functions for neutralization of toxins and pathogenic microbes.
Hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP), a long-lasting increase in synaptic efficacy, is the molecular basis for learning and memory. Tetanic stimulation of afferents in the CA1 region of the hippocampus induces glutamate release and activation of glutamate receptors in dendritic spines. A large increase in i resulting from influx through NMDA receptors leads to constitutive activation of CaM kinase II (CaM KII). Constitutively active CaM kinase II phosphorylates AMPA receptors, resulting in potentiation of the ionic conductance of AMPA receptors. Early-phase LTP (E-LTP) expression is due, in part, to this phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor. It is hypothesized that postsynaptic Ca2 + increases generated through NMDA receptors activate several signal transduction pathways including the Erk / MAP kinase and cAMP regulatory pathways. The convergence of these pathways at the level of the CREB / CRE transcriptional pathway may increase expression of a family of genes required for late-phase LTP (L-LTP).
Neurotrophins are a family of trophic factors involved in differentiation and survival of neural cells. The neurotrophin family consists of nerve growth factor (NGF), brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin 3 (NT-3), and neurotrophin 4 (NT-4). Neurotrophins exert their functions through engagement of Trk tyrosine kinase receptors or p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR). Neurotrophin / Trk signaling is regulated by connecting a variety of intracellular signaling cascades, which include MAPK pathway, PI-3 kinase pathway, and PLC pathway, transmitting positive signals like enhanced survival and growth. On the other hand, p75NTR transmits both positive and nagative signals. These signals play an important role for neural development and additional higher-order activities such as learning and memory.
Cerebellar long-term depression (LTD), thought to be a molecular and cellular basis for cerebellar learning, is a process involving a decrease in the synaptic strength between parallel fiber (PF) and Purkinje cells (PCs) induced by the conjunctive activation of PFs and climbing fiber (CF). Multiple signal transduction pathways have been shown to be involved in this process. Activation of PFs terminating on spines in dendritic branchlets leads to glutamate release and activation of both AMPA and mGluRs. Activation of CFs, which make multiple synaptic contacts on proximal dendrites, also via AMPA receptors, opens voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) and causes a generalized influx of calcium. These cellular signals, generated from two different synaptic origins, trigger a cascade of events culminating in a phosphorylation-dependent, long-term reduction in AMPA receptor sensitivity at the PF-PC synapse. This may take place either through receptor internalization and / or through receptor desensitization.
Within the compact cilia of the olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs) a cascade of enzymatic activity transduces the binding of an odorant molecule to a receptor into an electrical signal that can be transmitted to the brain. Odorant molecules bind to a receptor protein (R) coupled to an olfactory specific Gs-protein (G) and activate a type III adenylyl cyclase (AC), increasing intracellular cAMP levels. cAMP targets an olfactory-specific cyclic-nucleotide gated ion channel (CNG), allowing cations, particularly Na and Ca, to flow down their electrochemical gradients into the cell, depolarizing the ORN. Furthermore, the Ca entering the cell is able to activate a Ca-activated Cl channel, which would allow Cl to flow out of the cell, thus further increasing the depolarization. Elevated intracellular Ca causes adaptation by at least two different molecular steps: inhibition of the activity of adenylyl cyclase via CAMKII-dependent phosphorylation and down-regulation of the affinity of the CNG channel to cAMP.Longer exposure to odorants can stimulate particulate guanylyl cyclase in cilia to produce cGMP and activate PKG, leading to a further increase in amount and duration of intracellular cAMP levels, which may serve to convert inactive forms of protein kinase A (PKA2) to active forms (PKA *). As part of a feedback loop, PKA can inhibit the activation of particulate guanylyl cyclase.
Insulin binding to its receptor results in the tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrates (IRS) by the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase (INSR). This allows association of IRSs with the regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K). PI3K activates 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1), which activates Akt, a serine kinase. Akt in turn deactivates glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3), leading to activation of glycogen synthase (GYS) and thus glycogen synthesis. Activation of Akt also results in the translocation of GLUT4 vesicles from their intracellular pool to the plasma membrane, where they allow uptake of glucose into the cell. Akt also leads to mTOR-mediated activation of protein synthesis by eIF4 and p70S6K. The translocation of GLUT4 protein is also elicited through the CAP / Cbl / TC10 pathway, once Cbl is phosphorylated by INSR. Other signal transduction proteins interact with IRS including GRB2. GRB2 is part of the cascade including SOS, RAS, RAF and MEK that leads to activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and mitogenic responses in the form of gene transcription. SHC is another substrate of INSR. When tyrosine phosphorylated, SHC associates with GRB2 and can thus activate the RAS / MAPK pathway independently of IRS-1.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion from the hypothalamus acts upon its receptor in the anterior pituitary to regulate the production and release of the gonadotropins, LH and FSH. The GnRHR is coupled to Gq / 11 proteins to activate phospholipase C which transmits its signal to diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). DAG activates the intracellular protein kinase C (PKC) pathway and IP3 stimulates release of intracellular calcium. In addition to the classical Gq / 11, coupling of Gs is occasionally observed in a cell-specific fashion. Signaling downstream of protein kinase C (PKC) leads to transactivation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK. Active MAPKs translocate to the nucleus, resulting in activation of transcription factors and rapid induction of early genes.
Xenopus oocytes are naturally arrested at G2 of meiosis I. Exposure to either insulin / IGF-1 or the steroid hormone progesterone breaks this arrest and induces resumption of the two meiotic division cycles and maturation of the oocyte into a mature, fertilizable egg. This process is termed oocyte maturation. The transition is accompanied by an increase in maturation promoting factor (MPF or Cdc2 / cyclin B) which precedes germinal vesicle breakdown (GVBD). Most reports point towards the Mos-MEK1-ERK2 pathway and the polo-like kinase / CDC25 pathway as responsible for the activation of MPF in meiosis, most likely triggered by a decrease in cAMP.
Cutaneous melanin pigment plays a critical role in camouflage, mimicry, social communication, and protection against harmful effects of solar radiation. Melanogenesis is under complex regulatory control by multiple agents. The most important positive regulator of melanogenesis is the MC1 receptor with its ligands melanocortic peptides. MC1R activates the cyclic AMP (cAMP) response-element binding protein (CREB). Increased expression of MITF and its activation by phosphorylation (P) stimulate the transcription of tyrosinase (TYR), tyrosinase-related protein 1 (TYRP1), and dopachrome tautomerase (DCT), which produce melanin. Melanin synthesis takes place within specialized intracellular organelles named melanosomes. Melanin-containing melanosomes then move from the perinuclear region to the dendrite tips and are transferred to keratinocytes by a still not well-characterized mechanism.
Increased adipocyte volume and number are positively correlated with leptin production, and negatively correlated with production of adiponectin. Leptin is an important regulator of energy intake and metabolic rate primarily by acting at hypothalamic nuclei. Leptin exerts its anorectic effects by modulating the levels of neuropeptides such as NPY, AGRP, and alpha-MSH. This leptin action is through the JAK kinase, STAT3 phosphorylation, and nuclear transcriptional effect. Adiponectin lowers plasma glucose and FFAs. These effects are partly accounted for by adiponectin-induced AMPK activation, which in turn stimulates skeletal muscle fatty acid oxidation and glucose uptake. Furthermore, activation of AMPK by adiponectin suppresses endogenous glucose production, concomitantly with inhibition of PEPCK and G6Pase expression. The proinflammatory cytokine TNFalpha has been implicated as a link between obesity and insulin resistance. TNFalpha interferes with early steps of insulin signaling. Several data have shown that TNFalpha inhibits IRS1 tyrosine phosphorylation by promoting its serine phosphorylation. Among the serine / threonine kinases activated by TNFalpha, JNK, mTOR and IKK have been shown to be involved in this phosphorylation.
Insulin resistance is strongly associated with type II diabetes. Diabetogenic factors including FFA, TNFalpha and cellular stress induce insulin resistance through inhibition of IRS1 functions. Serine / threonine phosphorylation, interaction with SOCS, regulation of the expression, modification of the cellular localization, and degradation represent the molecular mechanisms stimulated by them. Various kinases (ERK, JNK, IKKbeta, PKCzeta, PKCtheta and mTOR) are involved in this process. The development of type II diabetes requires impaired beta-cell function. Chronic hyperglycemia has been shown to induce multiple defects in beta-cells. Hyperglycemia has been proposed to lead to large amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in beta-cells, with subsequent damage to cellular components including PDX-1. Loss of PDX-1, a critical regulator of insulin promoter activity, has also been proposed as an important mechanism leading to beta-cell dysfunction. Although there is little doubt as to the importance of genetic factors in type II diabetes, genetic analysis is difficult due to complex interaction among multiple susceptibility genes and between genetic and environmental factors. Genetic studies have therefore given very diverse results. Kir6.2 and IRS are two of the candidate genes. It is known that Kir6.2 and IRS play central roles in insulin secretion and insulin signal transmission, respectively.
Type I diabetes mellitus is a disease that results from autoimmune destruction of the insulin-producing beta-cells. Certain beta-cell proteins act as autoantigens after being processed by antigen-presenting cell (APC), such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and presented in a complex with MHC-II molecules on the surface of the APC. Then immunogenic signals from APC activate CD4 + T cells, predominantly of the Th1 subset. Antigen-activated Th1 cells produce IL-2 and IFNgamma. They activate macrophages and cytotoxic CD8 + T cells, and these effector cells may kill islet beta-cells by one or both of two types of mechanisms: (1) direct interactions of antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells with a beta-cell autoantigen-MHC-I complex on the beta-cell, and (2) non-specific inflammatory mediators, such as free radicals / oxidants and cytokines (IL-1, TNFalpha, TNFbeta, IFNgamma). Type I diabetes is a polygenic disease. One of the principle determining genetic factors in diabetes incidence is the inheritance of mutant MHC-II alleles. Another plausible candidate gene is the insulin gene.
About 2-5% of type II diabetic patients suffer from a monogenic disease with autosomal dominant inheritance. This monogenic form of type II diabetes is called maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We now know that MODY is caused by heterozygous mutations in at least five genes encoding transcription factors: HNF4alpha (MODY1), HNF1alpha (MODY3), PDX1 (MODY4), HNF1beta (MODY5) and NEUROD1 (MODY6). MODY2, which is so far the only subtype not related to a transcription factor, is caused by mutations in the glucokinase gene. Mutations of MODY transcription factor genes lead to abnormal expression of genes involved in pancreatic islet development and metabolism.
Sodium transport across the tight epithelia of Na + reabsorbing tissues such as the distal part of the kidney nephron and colon is the major factor determining total-body Na + levels, and thus, long-term blood pressure. Aldosterone plays a major role in sodium and potassium metabolism by binding to epithelial mineralocorticoid receptors (MR) in the renal collecting duct cells localized in the distal nephron, promoting sodium resorption and potassium excretion. Aldosterone enters a target cell and binds MR, which translocates into the nucleus and regulates gene transcription. Activation of MR leads to increased expression of Sgk-1, which phosphorylates Nedd4-2, an ubiquitin-ligase which targets ENAC to proteosomal degradation. Phosphorylated Nedd4-2 dissociates from ENAC, increasing its apical membrane abundance. Activation of MR also leads to increased expression of Na + / K + -ATPase, thus causing a net increase in sodium uptake from the renal filtrate. The specificity of MR for aldosterone is provided by 11beta-HSD2 by the rapid conversion of cortisol to cortisone in renal cortical collecting duct cells. Recently, besides genomic effects mediated by activated MR, rapid aldosterone actions that are independent of translation and transcription have been documented.
In the kidney, the antidiuretic hormone vasopressin (AVP) is a critical regulator of water homeostasis by controlling the water movement from lumen to the interstitium for water reabsorption and adjusting the urinary water excretion. In normal physiology, AVP is secreted into the circulation by the posterior pituitary gland, in response to an increase in serum osmolality or a decrease in effective circulating volume. When reaching the kidney, AVP binds to V2 receptors on the basolateral surface of the collecting duct epithelium, triggering a G-protein-linked signaling cascade, which leads to water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) vesicle insertion into the apical plasma membrane. This results in higher water permeability in the collecting duct and, driven by an osmotic gradient, pro-urinary water then passes the membrane through AQP2 and leaves the cell on the basolateral side via AQP3 and AQP4 water channels, which are constitutively expressed on the basolateral side of these cells. When isotonicity is restored, reduced blood AVP levels results in AQP2 internalization, leaving the apical membrane watertight again.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic disorder that slowly destroys neurons and causes serious cognitive disability. AD is associated with senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Amyloid-beta (Abeta), a major component of senile plaques, has various pathological effects on cell and organelle function. The extracellular Abeta oligomers may activate caspases through activation of cell surface death receptors. Alternatively, intracellular Abeta may contribute to pathology by facilitating tau hyper-phosphorylation, disrupting mitochondria function, and triggering calcium dysfunction. To date genetic studies have revealed four genes that may be linked to autosomal dominant or familial early onset AD (FAD). These four genes include: amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PS1), presenilin 2 (PS2) and apolipoprotein E (ApoE). All mutations associated with APP and PS proteins can lead to an increase in the production of Abeta peptides, specifically the more amyloidogenic form, Abeta42. FAD-linked PS1 mutation downregulates the unfolded protein response and leads to vulnerability to ER stress.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative movement disorder that results primarily from the death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Mutations in alpha-synuclein, UCHL1 (a ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1), parkin, DJ1 (a parkin-associated protein involved with oxidative stress), and PINK1 (a putative serine threonine kinase) are known to cause early-onset PD. Mutations or altered expression of these proteins contributes to PD pathogenesis through common mechanisms that result in proteasome dysfunction, mitochondrial impairment, and oxidative stress. Point mutations in alpha-synuclein and the recently described Iowan functional duplication of alpha-synuclein lead to excessive intracellular accumulation and protofibril formation. Decrease in the amount of soluble alpha-synuclein tends to increase free cytoplasmic dopamine and the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Indeed, formation of protofibrils or aggregates and Lewy bodies (LBs) diminishes the availability of the physiological forms of alpha-synuclein, favoring an increase in TH (tyrosine hydroxylase) and DAT (dopamine transporter), but diminishes vesicles formation and neuronal plasticity. Modification of parkin and UCHL1 are associated with the ubiquitin-proteasome system pathway and may increase proteotoxic stress. Mutations in parkin, DJ1, and PINK1 may alter mitochondiral activity, potentially impairing proteasomal function. Environmental toxins such as N-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and rotenone can cause mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, lethal, degenerative disorder of motor neurons. The hallmark of this disease is the selective death of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord, leading to paralysis of voluntary muscles. Mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), as seen in some familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) cases, may be toxic because it is unstable, forming aggregates in the motor neuron cytoplasm, axoplasm and mitochondria. Within mitochondria, mutant SOD1 may interfere with the anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2, affect mitochondrial import by interfering with the translocation machinery (TOM / TIM), and generate toxic free radicals (ROS) via aberrant superoxide chemistry. These changes may then result in abnormal mitochondrial energy metabolism, Ca2 + handling, and release of pro-apoptotic factors. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), produced within mitochondria, inhibit the function of EAAT2, the main glial glutamate transporter protein, responsible for most of the reuptake of synaptically released glutamate. Glutamate excess causes neurotoxicity by increasing intracellular calcium, which enhances oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage. Mutant SOD1 can also trigger oxidative reactions by various means including by increasing levels of peroxynitrite, which can then cause damage through the formation of hydroxyl radicals or via nitration of tyrosine residues on proteins. Nitration may target neurofilament proteins, disrupting their phosphorylation and affecting axonal transport. Collectively, these mechanisms (or a combination thereof) are predicted to disturb cellular homeostasis (within glial and / or motor neurons), ultimately triggering motor neuron death.
Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative disorder that primarily affects medium spiny striatal neurons (MSN). HD is caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the IT15 gene, which results in a long stretch of polyglutamine close to the amino-terminus of the HD protein huntingtin (Htt). Mutant Htt (mHtt) has effects both in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. In the cytoplasm, full-length mHtt can interfere with BDNF vesicular transport on microtubules. This mutant protein also may lead to abnormal endocytosis and secretion in neurons, because normal Htt form a complex with the proteins Hip1, clathrin and AP2 that are involved in endocytosis. In addition, mHtt affects Ca2 + signaling by sensitizing InsP3R1 to activation by InsP3, stimulating NR2B / NR1 NMDAR activity, and destabilizing mitochondrial Ca2 + handling. As a result, stimulation of glutamate receptors leads to supranormal Ca2 + responses in HD MSN and mitochondrial Ca2 + overload. The mHtt translocates to the nucleus, where it forms intranuclear inclusions, though they are not primarily responsible for toxicity. Nuclear toxicity is believed to be caused by interference with gene transcription, leading to loss of transcription of neuroprotective molecules such as BDNF. While mHtt binds to p53 and upregulates levels of nuclear p53 as well as p53 transcriptional activity. Augmented p53 mediates mitochondrial dysfunction.
Prion diseases, also termed transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), are a group of fatal neurodegenerative diseases that affect humans and a number of other animal species. The etiology of these diseases is thought to be associated with the conversion of a normal protein, PrPC, into an infectious, pathogenic form, PrPSc. The conversion is induced by prion infections (for example, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD), iatrogenic CJD, Kuru), mutations (familial CJD, Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome, fatal familial insomnia (FFI)) or unknown factors (sporadic CJD (sCJD)), and is thought to occur after PrPC has reached the plasma membrane or is re-internalized for degradation. The PrPSc form shows greater protease resistance than PrPC and accumulates in affected individuals, often in the form of extracellular plaques. Pathways that may lead to neuronal death comprise oxidative stress, regulated activation of complement, ubiquitin-proteasome and endosomal-lysosomal systems, synaptic alterations and dendritic atrophy, corticosteroid response, and endoplasmic reticulum stress. In addition, the conformational transition could lead to the lost of a beneficial activity of the natively folded protein, PrPC.
Cholera toxin (CTX) is one of the main virulence factors of Vibrio cholerae. Once secreted, CTX B-chain (CTXB) binds to ganglioside GM1 on the surface of the host's cells. After binding takes place, the entire CTX complex is carried from plasma membrane (PM) to endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In the ER, the A-chain (CTXA) is recognized by protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), unfolded, and delivered to the membrane where the membrane-associated ER-oxidase, Ero1, oxidizes PDI to release the CTXA into the protein-conducting channel, Sec61. CTXA is then retro-translocated to the cytosol and induces water and electrolyte secretion by increasing cAMP levels via adenylate cyclase (AC) to exert toxicity. Other than CTX, Vibrio cholerae generates several toxins that are perilous to eukaryotic cells. Zonula occludens toxin (ZOT) causes tight junction disruption through protein kinase C-dependent actin polymerization. RTX toxin (RtxA) causes actin depolymerization by covalently cross-linking actin monomers into dimers, trimers, and higher multimers. Vibrio cholerae cytolysin (VCC) is an important pore-forming toxin. The assembly of VCC anion channels in cells cause vacuolization and lysis.
Two major virulence factors of H. pylori are the vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA) and the cag type-IV secretion system (T4SS) and its translocated effector protein, cytotoxin-associated antigen A (CagA). VacA binds to lipid rafts and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) of the target cell membrane. After insertion into the plasma membrane, VacA channels are endocytosed and eventually reach late endosomal compartments, increasing their permeability to anions with enhancement of the electrogenic vacuolar ATPase (v-ATPase) proton pump. In the presence of weak bases, osmotically active acidotropic ions will accumulate in the endosomes. This leads to water influx and vesicle swelling, an essential step in vacuole formation. In addition, it is reported that the VacA cleavage product binds to the tyrosine phosphatase receptor zeta (Ptprz) on epithelial cells and the induced signaling leads to the phosphorylation of the G protein-coupled receptor kinase-interactor 1 (Git1) and induces ulcerogenesis in mice. The other virulence factor cag T4SS mediates the translocation of the effector protein CagA, which is subsequently phosphorylated by a Src kinase. Phosphorylated CagA interacts with the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, thus stimulating its phosphatase activity. Activated SHP-2 is able to induce MAPK signalling through Ras / Raf-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Deregulation of this pathway by CagA may lead to abnormal proliferation and movement of gastric epithelial cells.
Leishmania is an intracellular protozoan parasite of macrophages that causes visceral, mucosal, and cutaneous diseases. The parasite is transmitted to humans by sandflies, where they survive and proliferate intracellularly by deactivating the macrophage. Successful infection of Leishmania is achieved by alteration of signaling events in the host cell, leading to enhanced production of the autoinhibitory molecules like TGF-beta and decreased induction of cytokines such as IL12 for protective immunity. Nitric oxide production is also inhibited. In addition, defective expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes silences subsequent T cell activation mediated by macrophages, resulting in abnormal immune responses.
Classically, colorectal cancer (CRC) has been believed to develop from normal mucosa through the premalignant adenoma by the step-wise accumulation of mutations. All CRC display either microsatellite instability (MSI) or chromosome instability (CIN). MSI occurs in 15% of colon cancers and results from inactivation of the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system by either MMR gene mutations or hypermethylation of the MLH1 promoter. MSI promotes tumorigenesis through generating mutations in target genes that possess coding microsatellite repeats, such as beta-catenin, TGFBR2 and BAX. CIN is found in the majority of colon cancers and leads to a different pattern of gene alterations that contribute to tumor formation. Genes involved in CIN are those coding for APC, K-ras, SMAD4 and p53.
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a heterogenous term comprising a group of neoplasms of renal origin. There are 4 major histologic subtypes of RCC: conventional (clear cell RCC, 75%), papillary (15%), chromophobic (5%), and collecting duct (2%). Multiple genes are involved in the molecular pathogenesis of RCC. VHL is a tumor suppressor gene responsible for hereditary (von Hippel-Lindau) and sporadic variants of conventional (clear cell) RCC. In the absence of VHL, hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF-alpha) accumulates, leading to production of several growth factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor. An oncogene, MET has been found to be mutant in cases of hereditary papillary renal cancer (HPRC), although the incidence of c-MET mutations is low in sporadic papillary RCC. Once activated, MET mediates a number of biological effects including motility, invasion of extracellular matrix, cellular transformation, prevention of apoptosis and metastasis formation. Mutations in the fumarate hydratase (FH) gene cause hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cancer syndrome (HLRCC) papillary renal tumors, although the incidence of FH mutations in sporadic tumors is unknown. Loss of functional FH leads to accumulation of fumarate in the cell, triggering inhibition of HPH and preventing targeted pVHL-mediated degradation of HIF-alpha. BHD mutations cause the Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome and its associated chromophobe, hybrid oncocytic, and conventional (clear cell) RCC. The incidence of BHD mutations in sporadic renal tumors is not known.
Normal duct epithelium progresses to infiltrating cancer through a series of histologically defined precursors (PanINs). The overexpression of HER-2 / neu and activating point mutations in the K-ras gene occur early, inactivation of the p16 gene at an intermediate stage, and the inactivation of p53, SMAD4, and BRCA2 occur relatively late. Activated K-ras engages multiple effector pathways. Although EGF receptors are conventionally regarded as upstream activators of RAS proteins, they can also act as RAS signal transducers via RAS-induced autocrine activation of the EGFR family ligands. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) show elevated expression of EGF receptors (e.g. HER2 / neu) and their ligands (e.g.TGF-alpha) consistent with the presence of this autocrine loop. Moreover, PDA shows extensive genomic instability and aneuploidy. Telomere attrition and mutations in p53 and BRCA2 are likely to contribute to these phenotypes. Inactivation of the SMAD4 tumour suppressor gene leads to loss of the inhibitory influence of the transforming growth factor-beta signalling pathway.
Two types of endometrial carcinoma are distinguished with respect to biology and clinical course. Type-I carcinoma is related to hyperestrogenism by association with endometrial hyperplasia, frequent expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors and younger age, whereas type-II carcinoma is unrelated to estrogen, associated with atrophic endometrium, frequent lack of estrogen and progesterone receptors and older age. This classification has also been justified at the molecular level with Type 1 tumours being more commonly associated with abnormalities of DNA-mismatch repair genes, K-ras, PTEN and beta-catenin, and Type 2 tumours with abnormalities of p53 and HER2 / neu.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) formation is either de novo (primary GBMs) or due to the progression of a lower grade glioma to a higher grade one through the acquisition of additional mutations (secondary GBMs). In primary GBM, disruption of the p53 pathway often occurs through loss of ARF, or less frequently through amplification of MDM2. Disruption of the RB pathway occurs through loss of INK4A. Amplification and / or mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is the most frequently detected genetic defect that is associated with primary GBM. In secondary GBM, loss of p53 and activation of the growth-factorreceptor-tyrosine-kinase signalling pathway (such as through overexpression of PDGF / PDGFR) initiates tumour formation, whereas disruption of the retinoblastoma (RB) pathway contributes to the progression of tumour development. Loss of PTEN has been implicated in both pathways, although it is much more common in the pathogenesis of primary GBM.
The identification of key molecular alterations in prostate-cancer cells implicates carcinogen defenses (GSTP1), growth-factor-signaling pathways (NKX3.1, PTEN, and p27), and androgens (AR) as critical determinants of the phenotype of prostate-cancer cells. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTP1) are detoxifying enzymes that catalyze conjunction of glutathione with harmful, electrophilic molecules, thereby protecting cells from carcinogenic factors. Cells of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, devoid of GSTP1, undergo genomic damage mediated by such carcinogens. NKX3.1, PTEN, and p27 regulate the growth and survival of prostate cells in the normal prostate. Inadequate levels of PTEN and NKX3.1 lead to a reduction in p27 levels and to increased proliferation and decreased apoptosis. After therapeutic reduction in the levels of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, the emergence of androgen-independent prostate cancer has been associated with mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) that permit receptor activation by other ligands, increased expression of androgen receptors accompanying AR amplification, and ligand-independent androgen-receptor activation.
Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), the most frequent neoplasia originating from the thyroid epithelium, accounts for about 80% of all thyroid cancers. Chimeric oncogenes, created by chromosomal rearrangements involving prevalently RET and, to a less extent, NTRK1 loci, are implicated in the development of papillary carcinoma.These are inappropriately expressed and stimulate constitutive signaling, bypassing the need for receptor activation by growth factors. Alternatively, mutant RAS directly stimulates BRAF, whereas mutant BRAF directly stimulates MEK. Of all thyroid cancers, 15-20% are follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC). The most distinctive molecular features of follicular carcinoma are the prominence of aneuploidy and the high prevalence of RAS mutations and PAX8-PPAR-gamma rearrangements. The PPAR-gamma rearrangement functions through a dominant-negative effect on the transcriptional activity of wild-type PPAR-gamma. The fusion oncoprotein contributes to malignant transformation by targeting several cellular pathways, some of which are normally engaged by PPAR-gamma. Most poorly differentiated and undifferentiated thyroid carcinomas are considered to derive from pre-existing well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma through additional genetic events, including beta-catenin nuclear accumulation and p53 inactivation, but de novo occurrence might also occur.
The development of basal cell carcinoma is associated with constitutive activation of sonic hedgehog signaling. Normally, ligand-dependent signaling by Hedgehog (Hh) homologs proceeds through binding to the Patched receptor. This binding relieves the Patched-mediated inhibition of signaling through the Smoothened (SMOH) gene product. This signaling ultimately results in the dissociation of the Gli1 transcription factor from an inhibitory complex in the cytoplasm, its subsequent translocation to the nucleus, and activation of target gene expression. The mutations in SMOH, PTCH1, and SHH in BCCs result in continuous activation of target genes. At a cellular level, sonic hedgehog signaling promotes cell proliferation. Mutations in TP53 are also found with high frequency (> 50%) in sporadic BCC.
Five distinct stages have been proposed in the evolution of melanoma on the basis of histological criteria: common acquired and congenital nevi without dysplastic changes; dysplastic nevi with structural and architectural atypia; radial-growth phase (RGP) melanoma; vertical-growth phase (VGP) melanoma; and metastatic melanoma. Oncogenic NRAS mutations activate both effector pathways Raf-MEK-ERK and PI3K-Akt. The Raf-MEK-ERK pathway may also be activated via mutations in the BRAF gene. The PI3K-Akt pathway may be activated through loss or mutation of the inhibitory tumor suppressor gene PTEN. These mutations arise early during melanoma pathogenesis and are preserved throughout tumor progression. Moreover, melanoma development is strongly associated with inactivation of the p16INK4a / CDK4,6 / pRb and p14ARF / HMD2 / p53 tumor suppressor pathways. The vertical-growth phase and metastatic melanoma are notable for striking changes in the control of cell adhesion. Recently, amplification of the MITF gene was demonstrated in 10% of primary melanomas and 20% of metastatic melanomas, suggesting that MITF is a melanoma oncogene.
Bladder cancer arise and progress along two distinctive pathways. The first of these is often preceded by simple and papillary hyperplasia and exhibits a tumour morphology that is low-grade, superficial and papillary. Papillary carcinoma has a tendency to recur locally, but rarely invades and metastasizes. These tumors frequently show a constitutive activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase-Ras pathway, exhibiting activating mutations in the HRAS and fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) genes. The second tumour pathway is characterized by high-grade muscle-invasive tumours, which either originate from flat carcinoma in situ (CIS) / severe dysplasia or arise de novo. Over half of these tumours show defects in the tumour suppressors p53 and / or the retinoblastoma protein (RB) genes and pathways, and over 50% of these tumours progress to local and distant metastases. Some of the cell cycle-related molecules show evidence of epigenetic modulation through aberrant promoter hypermethylation in invasive bladder cancer. Invasion and metastases are promoted by several factors that alter the tumour microenvironment, including the aberrant expression of E-cadherins (E-cad), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) is a biphasic disease, initiated by expression of the BCR / ABL fusion gene product in self-renewing, haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). HSCs can differentiate into common myeloid progenitors (CMPs), which then differentiate into granulocyte / macrophage progenitors (GMPs). HSCs can also differentiate into common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), which are the progenitors of lymphocytes such as T cells and B cells. The initial chronic phase of CML (CML-CP) is characterized by a massive expansion of the granulocytic-cell series. Acquisition of additional genetic mutations beyond expression of BCR / ABL causes the progression of CML from chronic phase to blast phase (CML-BP), characterized by an accumulation of myeloid or lymphoid blast cells. The BCR / ABL fusion gene encodes p210BCR / ABL, an oncoprotein, which, unlike the normal p145 c-Abl, has constitutive tyrosine kinase activity and is predominantly localized in the cytoplasm. The tyrosine kinase activity is essential for cell transformation and the cytoplasmic localization of BCR / ABL allows the assembly of phosphorylated substrates in multiprotein complexes that transmit mitogenic and antiapoptotic signals. Additional cytogenetic and molecular changes are frequently found in patients with CML during the progression of the disease from chronic to blast phase. Some of the genetic changes include mutations in TP53, RB, and CDKN2A (also known as p16INK4A), or overexpression of genes such as EVI1. Additional chromosome translocations are also observed, such as t (3; 21) (q26; q22), which generates AML1 / EVI1. AML1 / EVI-1 represses TGF-beta-mediated growth inhibitory signal.
Two major types of genetic events are crucial for the molecular pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemias (AML): activating mutations of signal transduction intermediates and alterations in myeloid transcription factors governing hematopoietic differentiation. Both aberrant and constitutive activation of signal transduction molecules are found in about 50% of primary AML bone marrow samples, and seem to contribute to the increased proliferation and apoptosis resistance. The most common of these activating events were observed in the RTK Flt3, in N-Ras and K-Ras, in Kit, and sporadically in other RTKs. Specific haematopoietic transcription factors are crucial for differentiation to particular lineages during normal differentiation, but are frequently disrupted in AML. Some mechanisms of disruption involve the effect of fusion proteins that are generated by chromosomal translocations on haematopoietic transcription factors. In other cases, the transcription factors themselves are mutated.
Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is a highly aggressive neoplasm, which accounts for approximately 20% of all lung cancer cases. Molecular mechanisms altered in SCLC include induced expression of oncogene, MYC, and loss of tumorsuppressor genes, such as p53, PTEN, RB, and FHIT. The overexpression of MYC proteins in SCLC is largely a result of gene amplification. Such overexpression leads to more rapid proliferation and loss of terminal differentiation. Mutation or deletion of p53 or PTEN can lead to more rapid proliferation and reduced apoptosis. The retinoblastoma gene RB1 encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein that helps to regulate cell-cycle progression. The fragile histidine triad gene FHIT encodes the enzyme diadenosine triphosphate hydrolase, which is thought to have an indirect role in proapoptosis and cell-cycle control.
Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for approximately 80% of lung cancer and represents a heterogeneous group of cancers, consisting mainly of squamous cell (SCC), adeno (AC) and large-cell carcinoma. Molecular mechanisms altered in NSCLC include activation of oncogenes, such as K-RAS and c-erbB-2, and inactivation of tumorsuppressor genes, such as p53, p16INK4a, RAR-beta, and RASSF1. Point mutations within the K-RAS gene inactivate GTPase activity and the p21-RAS protein continuously transmits growth signals to the nucleus. Overexpression of c-erbB-2 or EGFR leads to a proliferative advantage. Inactivating mutation of p53 can lead to more rapid proliferation and reduced apoptosis. The protein encoded by the p16INK4a inhibits formation of CDK-cyclin-D complexes by competitive binding of CDK4 and CDK6. Loss of p16INK4a expression is a common feature of NSCLC RAR-beta is a nuclear receptor that bears vitamin-A-dependent transcriptional activity. RASSF1A is able to form heterodimers with Nore-1, an RAS effector.Therefore loss of RASSF1A might shift the balance of RAS activity towards a growth-promoting effect.
Inhaled allergens encounter antigen presenting cells (APC) that line the airway. Upon recognition of the antigen and activation by APC, naive T cells differentiate into TH2 cells, a process that is promoted by interleukin 4 (IL-4). Activated TH2 cells stimulate B cells to produce IgE antibodies in response to IL-4 and IL-13. IgE binds the high affinity IgE receptor at the surface of mast cells, the proliferation and differentiation of which is promoted by IL-9.The crosslinking of mast-cell-bound IgE by allergens leads to the release of biologically active mediators (histamine, leukotrienes) by means of degranulation and, so, to the immediate symptoms of allergy. Activated mast cells and Th2 cells also induce the production of IL-5. IL-5 travels to the bone marrow and regulates the differentiation and egress of eosinophils from the bone marrow into the blood. Moreover activated mast cells and Th2 cells in the lung generate the cytokines interleukin IL-4, IL-13 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF) -alpha. These cytokines stimulate the generation of eotaxin by lung epithelial cells, fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. Eotaxin then stimulates the selective recruitment of eosinophils from the airway microvessels into the lung tissue. The activation of eosinophils leads to release of toxic granules and oxygen free radicals that lead to tissue damage and promote the development of chronic inflammation.
The classification of autoimmune throid disease (AITD) includes Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) or chronic autoimmune thyroiditis and its variants, Graves' disease (GD) and autoimmune atrophic thyroiditis or primary myxedema. HT is characterized by the presence of goitre, thyroid autoantibodies against thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and thyroglobulin (Tg) in serum and varying degrees of thyroid dysfunction. During HT, self-reactive CD4 + T lymphocytes (Th) recruit B cells and CD8 + T cells (CTL) into the thyroid. Disease progression leads to the death of thyroid cells and hypothyroidism. Both autoantibodies and thyroid-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) have been proposed to be responsible for autoimmune thyrocyte depletion. In GD, the TSH-R is the most important autoantigen. Antibodies directed against it mimic the effects of the hormone on thyroid cells, TSH, stimulating autonomous production of thyroxine and triiodothyronine and causing hyperthyroidism. The presence of TSH-R-blocking antibodies that bind the TSH receptor in a similar fashion to the antibodies in patients with Graves' disease but that block rather than activate the receptor explains some cases of atrophic hypothyroidism.
After transplantation of organ allografts, there are two pathways of antigen presentation. In the direct pathway, recipient T cells react to intact allogeneic MHC molecules expressed on the surface of donor cells. This pathway would activate host CD4 or CD8 T cells. In contrast, donor MHC molecules (and all other proteins) shed from the graft can be taken up by host APCs and presented to recipient T cells in the context of self-MHC molecules - the indirect pathway. Such presentation activates predominantly CD4 T cells. A direct cytotoxic T-cell attack on graft cells can be made only by T cells that recognize the graft MHC molecules directly. Nontheless, T cells with indirect allospecificity can contribute to graft rejection by activating macrophages, which cause tissue injury and fibrosis, and are also likely to be important in the development of an alloantibody response to graft.
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) pathophysiology can be summerized in a three-step process. During step 1, the conditioning regimen (irradiation and / or chemotherapy) leads to damage, activation of host tissues and induction of inflammatory cytokines secretion. Increased expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens and adhesion molecules leads to enhancement of the recognition of host MHC and / or minor histocompatibility antigens by mature donor T cells. Donor T-cell activation in step II is characterized by the predominance of Th1 cells and the secretion of IL-2 and IFN-gamma. These cytokines induce further T-cell expansion, induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) and natural killer (NK) cells responses and prime additional mononuclear phagocytes to produce TNF-alpha and IL-1. Also, nitric oxide (NO) is produced by activated macrophages, and it may contribute to the tissue damage seen during step 3. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which leaks through the intestinal mucosa that was damaged during step 1, together with IFN-gamma, from step 2, further stimulate macrophages to secrete cytokines and NO. During step 3, the effector phase, activated CTL and NK cells mediate cytotoxicity against target host cells through Fas-Fas ligand interactions and perforin-granzyme B.
Myocarditis is a cardiac disease associated with inflammation and injury of the myocardium. It results from various etiologies, both noninfectious and infectious, but coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) is still considered the dominant etiological agent. Myocarditis may be caused by direct cytopathic effects of virus, a pathologic immune response to persistent virus, or autoimmunity triggered by the viral infection. The virus enters the myocyte through internalization of the coxsackie-adenoviral receptor (CAR) and its coreceptor, decay-accelerating factor (DAF). Viral proteases cleave various proteins in the host cell. One example is viral protease 2A, which cleaves eukaryote initiation factor 4G (eIF4G) and the dystrophin protein, resulting in a complete shutdown of cap-dependent RNA translation and cytoskeletal destruction in infected cardiomyocytes, respectively. CVB3 also cleaves the member of the Bcl-2 family Bid, leading to apoptosis. CVB3 infection also induces the cleavage of cyclin D protein through a proteasome-dependent pathway, leading to the host cell-growth arrest. Viral infection and necrosis of myocytes may lead to the release of intracellular antigens, resulting in activation of self-reactive T cells. CVB infection is a significant cause of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) as well as myocarditis. Epidemiologically, myocarditis underlies a significant portion of patients with DCM.
